It's on?
Yes.
My name is Regina Zielinski  I was born in Poland. My maiden name was Feldman and I was born  in 1925.
I don't actually know where to begin, but the day, the month December is a very, very sad month for
me, because the 20th of December we were taking  from our slave labor camp Staw to a place we didn't
even know where we were going, but when we arrived it was Sobibor. And nobody knew about Sobibor. We
never knew about Sobibor, the whole transport was on a horse driven wagon, it was about seven hundred
people of us from the slave labor camp. And when we arrived in Sobibor it was almost, it was not almost
night time, because the days also showed in winter time in Europe and eh the camp was lit like day light
and a lot ofloud speakers eh, eh were playing and when we arrived we all had to get off, out the wagons.
They segregated the men and they did the sons,  and they did separate and the woman and their daughters,
it was separate and then there was a podium there and a very tall SS man was standing on the podium and
he ask who can knit. And my mother pushed me out and she said 'you are a good knitter, step out'
and if you, there was about twelve of us, or thirteen of us, who stepped out that we can knit. And I
said to my sister 'how about you'? She said 'I'll stay with mum, because we might be assigned
to different work'. And they took us away to a very, very big barrack and there was only eh, eh walls
and a roof, they gave us a couple of blankets and, but you know December is the middle of winter, it
was very, very, very cold and we were huddling all together, all night, we heard a lot of machinery running,
but we didn't know what it was and in the morning they came in, a couple of SS men came in, or guards,
we don't know, but they were Germans and they took us out from that barrack to take us somewhere else,
because they came over with men and working gear and all that they were going to build the bara, barrack
up, so half of us they were sit here, banks made where we can sleep. And the other half is going to be
a knitting room. And the knitting room, later on you know they build it all up, but while they were doing
that, another German took us away to a very big barrack. And that barrack had mountains of shoes  and
there was on a c, not quite on a corner a small, small heap of shoes and that eh German guard [clears
throat], excuse me, picked up shoes and for so, he wanted to show us how, how they, good they are. He
said your shoes are might be dirty or worn out and they was handing and the guard shows all of us pairs
tight together and when he gave me a pair of boots and he said 'they might fit you.  My dear, that
was my sister's boots!  Then I knew what Sobibor was. Because while we were on the way coming to Sobibor,
my youngest brother was still on the wagon with mum, my sister and a lot of other women, there was a
crossroad, one was going to Chelm and the other one was going to Wlodawa and when we turned to left,
to Wlodawa, it might be a half an hour later we driving through very big forests, on the each side that
the the German were on, on eh, eh riding on the horses and watching us that nobody will escape.-
And a couple of young people escaped, they stopped the transport, they went into the forest, they
shot them and brought them back and they told us that will happen to, for everybody who wants to escape
and  on the way when we turned, I must go back to tell you what my brother said when he was sitting
with us. Normally the men, elder, elder, he was only eleven years old, but he survived the, the slave
labor camp in Staw and he said to us, he said actually to my mother, mum, he said, let's say goodbye
to the night, because we won't see the daylight. Where that boy heard something in the camp, what
Sobibor was, he never explained, we never knew, because he was hiding in Sobibor, because quite a
few times they were taking out the children you know who is sick and took them away. And one day when
we were even walk, going to work there were trenches open and later on we heard a lot of shooting,
a lot of people got shot and there was one ye, a boy, he was seven years old, with his mother in the,
in, in, in the camp and he, they were from Lublin from, from another city, and he, her husband was
a, a Polish soldier, a Jewish Polish soldier and I don't know if he survived or not, but when they
took out all the children and other sick people, that little boy, later on the Polish people witnessed
that,  said to the Germans because he could speak, not from Lublin, from Polsenheim he could speak
German, and he was supposed to say to the Germans if you want to shoot us, I want to be the first.
Later on they will told us and the mother find out when we came back from work, that the beautiful
boy was not there anymore.  And I don't have to tell you much what happened to people like that.
And then we realised, later on I realised what my mother, brother Paul said to us let's say goodbye
to the night, because we will never see all the persons, the whole of my family, left alive. When
I was handed over my sister's boots I knew that Sobibor was not a normal concentration camp, it
was a death camp.  And the 20th of December 1942 I lost my whole world. I was the only one left alive.
There was somebody with me, a second cousin, she was alive too, Zelda Metz   and that was from, from
the people I knew, the others were from different cities, because that transport was seven hundred
people, of us.
Where did the, Regina, where did this transport come from?
From Staw, it was from Staw, from a slave labor camp. [spells] S T A W, Staw,  there's another
name to it, but it's too long, that was a very big slave labour camp. Because there were all
the, the Jewish people from the ghettos, from all around Siedliczcze from Chelm, you name it, little,
you know, places around a bigger city, there was allover is farmers and all that, all the Jewish
people were gathered in that particular camp. You know. In Staw and all of us, a lot died of hunger
and sickness and stuff. Because there wasn't enough, everything as rationed and it was so cold
and, but people do it first when we were in ghetto at home, we had to dig trenches to straighten
a river. When that was finished we were taken to Staw to do the same thing, to straighten a river
and the winter was coming on, we went to Staw the 22nd of October 1942. We were only two months
there and then the 20th of December we were taken to Sobibor.
Regina, when you talk about your family
Yes?
how large was your family?
My family, I had, my brother died before then and I had, that's another story how
my b, eldest brother died. It was when the Germans came into Siedliczcze they, they
took a lot of things away and then they burned eh first of all ghetto.
All the Jews one day, that was the 18th of May 1942 or '41, doesn't matter. We were
'41.
we, we went to work and when we were coming back from work the 18th of May, '41 I think
Yes.
and we were not allowed to go back home anymore. It was a beautiful day, so nice and warm because May
is spring and what we had owned for work, that's what we were left on, and that when they, they cornered
off a few streets and we were going to, to stay in the ghetto, we were not allowed home anymore. And
from that ghetto we were taking to Staw and that was a slave labour camp. There was already a lot of
people missing, whatever, you know that, that the thing was rationed, there is a lot, a lot of other
things happening, but it's a little bit, might be too much to drag it on, you know
No, it's not.
when, when we were in ghetto we had to, to go; our house was taken over like from, in  German, were
the Wasserwirtschaftsamt, that was we were working for to straighten the rivers and our house was taken
over by the engineer and two girls. One was Irene and the other Myszka, they were the secretaries,
the Wasserwirtschaftsambt and the eh, engineer was Kiendracki. And he was such a lovely man, he wanted
to help that many people and because people get assigned in the ghetto close to our hou, not house,
but we had a very big property and eh building material property and about a, an acre of garden like
eh fruit trees and other things was growing in there, in that little cottage where a engineer lived,
we were assigned for seven people a cottage in the ghetto. And because it was so close to our property,
the, the  engineer has said you can go in  but make it so that nobody will look eh, like, like a hole
in the fence in, go through to your garden and pick whatever it's ripe there, even fruit or vegetable,
but it was still growing and you take it and that will help you a lot to share with other people. Because
nobody is going to pick it from that garden, they didn't need it. That what I mean that he was so
good. In another time he came over to my other sister and myself and my mother, he said that the two
ladies, the secretaries would like somebody to come and clean their place. And that was our house,
he only meant it that way that we can take a little bit clothes out of the cupboards. So we went there
to clean and every day we put on different things, so we had something in the ghetto to change ourselves
and warm, because winter was coming, warm clothes too and he was such the perfect angel for us that,
that engineer, you know? He was good for everybody else, you know, to, to work out for the woman to
have lighter work, where there were send the soil to dig you know, sometimes he was standing knee,
knee deep in water to straighten the rivers, I told you not, and he, we managed to do it and it was
we managed to survive.
Can you talk a little bit about the house? Because I know
when you were talking about it now, you see it.
I see it.
And I, I don't
It was
know the house.
it was a very big, like a ranch house and that was divided in half because my grandmother and greatgrandmother
had eh one half and we had the other half. And because there was five of us, I had three brothers and
one sister, and the grandmother and greatgrandmother gave up a quarter of their place, so we will have
bigger rooms, for five of us. And that was, the property was about an acre, it was building material
property. We needed a lot of room. And when the property was not finished, but on the end there was
a brook, and, and that was the end of our property. There was a very big, might be an acre, might be
more, we had a garden, fruit trees and vegetable garden and shrubs and all that. So we were a lot,
a lot self sufficient in the summer. Because we were growing everything and we had even a horse and
we had a cow and we had a lot of different, you know, chicken and geeses and, and, and ducks and you
name it. We had everything there. The property was so big.
What did you do?
My hou, my father was helping people like to build the, the farmers houses,
of farmers eh, eh what is it called to whatever keeping the hay and straw, what
is it called, the big, big eh, help me out with that word, I forgot
I don't know which word you are looking for.
At, anyhow eh, sh, not shacks, what do farmers have
where they keep the, the, the winter stuff in it?
Staples?
It, it will come to me and it, it's not so important. And he was helping a lot of eh, in the, in the
to build houses up for the farmers and every Thursday there was the weekly eh market day and a lot of
people were coming over with their produce and a lot of eh, eh cabinet makers and, and other people were
coming over for timber, for make doors and windows and, and garages and all that. They were coming on
Thursday, they were coming to buy that what my parents had for sale. And that, but needed a lot, a lot
of room, because that timber there, everything had to be on the roofs, it was all covered so it wasn't,
timber that was coming straight from the saw mills. That was coming into our place, because the saw
mills were not far away. Father used to go there and order it and then, and the farmers used to bring
over the, the timber. And that was for the work, you know, the ones who, who, who, you know, the market
was always full with  not just eh what they were making, but, but just, you know, cows and other things
and live stock and all that, every Thursday there was market day.
But you were fifteen when you went, send to the ghetto. What was
Yes.
your, what were your daily chores, what were your doing?
In the ghetto?
No, before, at the house.
Before I was still at school. The war broke out when I was fourteen and I didn't, the Germans when
they came in they saw the Jewish people were not to go back to school, because the schoolyear in Europe,
you know it too, that starts in September. In September the war started, the Jewish people, the pupils
will have dif, special schools, we never go to special school, we had to register ourselves for work,
from fifteen years old. So mum makes us all a year older, so that I was fourteen but she made it out
that I was fifteen, so my sister was a year older and the eldest brother, so we all can fit in, the
brother after me could fit in for work too, only the youngest couldn't, he was too young then. And
then we were all going out to work from home to straighten the rivers. You know the Mogilanka river,
yes. And when that finished, it was the ghetto. Instead from
Do you mind me to come back on my question?
Yes?
I want you to talk about the old house.
Oh, the house.
And what you did the full day, because you didn't go to school many years.
Man, man, not many years. No, it wasn't many years. It was only one year when we
Did you work on the land or eh
No, I
did you take care of the ducks
you know, we helped out at home and eh  there was always something to do, then we had to eh arrange
for teachers, there was a teacher who was teaching us at home and the boys were being tought by somebody,
you know, like a cheider, we couldn't go anymore to school or then, there always, you know, there
was something to do before you know, the ghetto and we have to give up a lot of things we have to
get, gave up, later on we had to stand in a queue with a bucket of timber or coal to that, you know,
to get, because everything was rationed. What did we do at home I can't tell you what we were doing
at home when the war broke out. There were that many different things, we had a lot of people from
western Poland that was escaping from the front who were coming.We heard from, from a lot, a lot of
big cities, you know, they were from  and would  go but to the, to the east to get away and a lot
was escaping to, to, to Russia and then, and the war broke out, you know, with the Germans and Russia,
that, that was like a volcano that place, you know?
But do you mind to come back to your house before the war?
Before the war?
Yes.
I was at school.
Yes?
Yes. And my sister, my brother was at high school, he was learning, my sister was one
year in Warsaw at the high school, you know, she was learning kiput , what was it called,
eh  eh, handel, handelschule, handelschule, how would that be in English, eh
A commercial schule
Commercial yes, yes, commercial. And my brother was in a different commercial thing, but he was next
in Chelm, but my sister went to Warsaw and just when the war broke out she was only one year there.
How she got back from Warsaw when the war was raging, I don't know. You know. What we did, before,
we were all young children, you know? We were helping out what we could at home, grandmother told us
to cook and to, and to clean and all that and, and you know, she was always there to help and, and
greatgrandmother told us how to knit and, and, and you know, and how to, my sister was a, an artist
of the broidery, she didn't like knitting, so I will, I was the knitter and she
slSL You were?
Sp I will do something else, you know? And that, for I was doing the
knitting in the camp in Sobibor, you know? You know, that was eh, I don't
know, saved my life, the knitting, I don't know. Anyhow.
Was it a religious family?
I beg you pardon?
Oh, we were not fanatics. It was a little bit like liberal. But we were observing very much all the
holidays. We girls ne, never were tought anything like the boys ant cheider but one year before the
war, we managed a lady, she was a widow and very fair, you know, she had enough to hire a teacher,
and she gave half her house up to teach the girls eh Hebrew and, and the other things and other, so
one year only I had to, to learn a little bit more than tradition, because at home, what we were learning
about Jew, Jewish it was only tradition, what it meant, that holiday what it meant or something else,
and twice a year we used to go with mum to the synagogue. That was only at Pesach and eh  three times
a year, Rosj Hasjana and Jom Kippur, there was the girls never went to, to Sjoel from long and all
that. And that's what we learned a year before the war and eh, and didn't know much. Later on
you know it's so easy to forget the Hebrew. I still know the, the eh alphabet in Hebrew, that's
what I eh I remember, that was all. But later on, in Australia I learned a little bit more about it.
Where I lived in Sidney the synagogue was teaching us. And eh  I don't know how to explain  we were
very traditional, you know, with everything because grandmother and greatgrandmother was there too.
And they were, I don't know how to say, because eh we used to go to the synagogue, they had their
places, their chairs in the, when the big synagogue was build, later on the Germans burnt it down
and that's where mein, eldest brother was sitting all day, that was in September, and eh cleaning
the, the bricks of the synagogue, that was a day before the 11th of September, before the Jewish'
newyear and after the day was over, he came home and he felt not good. He said he doesn't want anything,
he just wanted to lie down and he laid down in bed and by the time the evening came, there was curfew,
we couldn't go out bef, after eight o'clock at night, we have to wait for the boy to come about
and then when they come and they didn't come and my brother needed a doctor. We had doctors, but
we couldn't go out to call them. And by the time the doctor, six o'clock in the morning, it was
too late.
He died of a m, massive hart attack.  And he was only twenty two years old.  And I remember the,
the minute when he passed away. He was on, lying on the bed  and my mum correct a little bit his
pillow and I was standing on the foot of his bed and eh  and I ask him would he like me to do something.
But I could hear that he hit with his feet, he hit the bed and that was his last  breath. So I
was witnessing my brother's passing.  That was the 11th of September 1942. It was the  of Rosj
Hasjana. And then he still had, my mum used to help us out a little bit, because my sister was
very close, I was close with him too, because he was the eldest and she was very sick, and mum
said he is going to heaven and no more Jewish burial but we don't know where we will end up.
He still had, you know, because his still was buried on the Jewish cemetary. Later on we found
out, we saw it anyhow, that the Germans took out all the headstones, turned them upsidedown and
they made footpaths out of them.  So that was the, the history what the Germans did  I can't
explain anything else anymore, because that was the grave of the whole family of, of everything,
for everyone and I was left alone.  That's what I know.
Did you, Regina, did you ever expect the war to come to  Siedliczcze?
Did I
Did you expect the war to come, did your family talk about a threat?
Oh, we, we heard, we heard that, you know, that a lot of people were escaping from Czechoslovakia,
from Austria, we had them all in Poland because the, eh, annexation in 1938, Austria was, you know,
to, to Germany and they didn't like the Jews. And the one people who in Austria or German who where
be poor and born in Poland, but they lived for that long in the country, they were send back to Poland,
because they were Jewish and we had to put them all up, you know, and all that we heard about what,
what is happening in the north, what they are doing and eh  you see, my father registered us to go
to, to Palestine in 1937. We were going to migrate from Poland, but there was a quote to get to Palestine.
The English had a quote to let in from Poland that many Jews a year. And we were too far away from
the quote, we never managed to get there. Because the war broke out two years after. So that's
the history how we liked, would have loved to be somewhere, maybe would have, but that was not meant
to. But the only thing I remember, and I'll never forget, Pechersky. He helped a lot with the escape.
I don't know if you've, the date when they brought in the Russian prisoners of war, that was
the 23rd of September 1943.
But Regina
Yes?
you're going so fast, so maybe I may slow you down?
Yes.
Eh  because we have enough time to talk about all
Talk about, yes.
yes and don't feel hurried please.
No, I won't.
Before the Germans came, I assume the Russians came?
Oh, the Russians were one week only.  I forgot, forgot about it. When the Polish
army was gathering  all across Poland to the very big river Bug because they were
going to assemble a front for the Germans on the other side of the river, and when
German and the Russian signed the eh  what is it called Northern
Non agression Agreement
The non agression with the, with the Russians and when the Polish army got through the water, they took
the army, the Russian, the communist, took the army away, all the, the officers were taken separate to
an ordinary soldier. And the officer were taking to a forest who was called Katyn  forest, you know,
where twelve thousand officers were shot there and buried in the forest. We found that out after the
war. Every officer had one bullet of the back of, of his head and the hands were tight up in the back
and they were in the Katyn forest. And the ordinary soldier was taken to Siberia.  And my future husband,
he was an officer but he was wounded on the Rumanian border and because of his wounds he was stripped
from his uniform, because others wanted it, the, the boots and all that and that saved his life, because
he didn't go with the officers, he was an ordinary soldier and he was taken  to, to Siberia. I later
on, when I met him, and he, and later on the Germans when they declared war on Russia, and because he
was born, he was born in Aus, in eh,  south Prussia, that was once, have you  heard of Danzig , that
big, big city, the free city that was in Pruissian, he was born not far there and they thought, because
he was from there, he might sign the papers as a, as a German, because his father was in the Bismarck
army before Hitler came along and they thought that he will sign, so they got all the Polish  eh prisoner
of war from Russia, they got them all out, but he didn't signed with the Germans, he was in a Polish
prisoner of war in Germany, not far from Frankfurt.  And later on I found that out, later on when I was
in Frankfurt, that's where I met him. Yes. Now
No, I  you're going so fast again.
So fast. Hm.
How long was your husband in Siberia?
I don't know when, when they took him out, I don't know how long he was, because
it was so and the German took all the others out, with somebody with a general Sikorsky
took all the, the Polish prisoners from Russian out, I don't know much about
it, how long he was. But how he survived is almost a miracle.
But for a week the Russians where in Siedliczcze
Yes.
have you seen them?
Yes. Yes, yes, yes, we had before
Can you tell me how you first met the Russian army?
Russian army, that was, the Jewish newyear, Rosj Hasjana, and they first came in because we've had
the big property, so the cav, cavalery, you know, not the, the  the one on foot, the soldiers
Infantry.
infantry, and then they, the one on the horses, so the horses was stationed at our place. And
a lot of the Polish army came in and eh there were going to, to cross the, the, the, the
The Bug
the, the Bug river and I remember there was somebody from eh, eh  northern, northern Poland where
my grandmother had eh relatives there and there was a Polish officer, but Jewish Polish officer and
he, my grandmother called out, maybe somebody [...] the officer will be somebody from there and he
was there and some other officers and they stationed there for one night, because there were all that
many coming and coming, the infantry and I remember one officer ask my mother what would you rather
have, the Germans or the Russian? And I still can hear her wo, words, she said, well how can you chose
from two deadly diseases?  That was her answer. And then they were, they crossed the Bug and the Russian
took the army away. The Polish army.  I think I said that before. Before that what they did to them.
But I don't know how long that eh, later on when he became my husband I've found he was in Germany
as a prisoner, Polish prisoner of war. In Frankfurt.
But my question was
Yes?
Regina,  how did you see, what was the first Russian you met? They came to Siedliczcze.
Yes, they came in, they looked
How did you know?
that they looked in and we had white bread to - on the table, you know
how Rosj Hasjana, how we had celebrating the, the, the holiday.
So you were sitting at the Rosj Hasjana table?
table when they came in and they looked in, we had that particular door, had, the half of it was glass,
they looked in and we opened up some, I don't know who got up from the table to open the door, and
some of them come in and then mein parents understood Russian because they were from the First Worldwar,
the Russians was there, so they learned Russia and, and eh he looked at the white bread of the challah,
and he ask us, I still remember those words, because we understood a little bit of Russia, we were supposed
not to, and he said [says something in Russian], that means what is that?
He didn't know?
They didn't know what Challah was, what white bread was.
And so then
And we explained to it them and all that and the, all they wanted it to get and you know that they, one
even went to a watch maker, he took an alarm clock and because that was big, and he ask him could he
make two wrist watches out of that clock, what they ever could gather eh, eh for valuables they never
ask how much, they just took it and all that and then when the Ru, Germans came along  and the Russian
had to leave  and that  didn't have anybody, we didn't have any, any soldiers from the Russians and
we didn't have any German soldiers, like  hooligans, was to inc, eh, I don't know, there is a word
for it, you know, breaking everything and they had ammunition from the soldiers who were running away
or something, I don't know, shooting, so a delegation went from Siedliczcze to Chelm to ask the Germans
to come in and to straighten everything out a little bit, because we
You mean after the Russian left
The Russian
there was chaos.
Yes. It was nobody there, we didn't have any police, because the Russian
No protection, yes.
no, no protection, the Russian took all the Polish police away and then the Germans send over
from western Poland, police, Polish police. But from western Poland, because Russian didn't
give the, the people  up once they took, and a lot of the people who were a little bit, you know,
a little bit more, how, how, had the shops and had the little bit, not just or, all
Middle class, yes.
yes, not ordinary workers, because he was looking in the people's hands and
if, if they didn't have callousis that meant that they were Russia, eh
very, very rich.
Yes.
You know, so they don't deserve much, because that, all that, they were taken away and even they took
the priest away and there was a deacan and they took a lot of prominent people from Siedliczcze away
and all that and then, then, when the Germans came, they did the same, took a lot prominent people, the
school teachers away and they will be send back, if nothing happened to a German soldier or something,
I never know if they ever got back or not, because we were not there anymore. You know.
Were you scared of the Russians?
No, we were not scared, but they, they didn't treat us normal, like, like, like eh, eh, it might
the hierarchy was a little bit better educated, but the ordinary soldier, they, they, some of the
soldiers had only a hole in a blanket and a rope tied around to the waist and a rifle, that was
all that the infantry, they were not even dressed properly as soldiers. Only the hierarchy was dressed
alright, you know. On the horses and all that. You know. But not the infantry.
And the Germans were better organised?
Oh yes, they were to try, they were plundering everything too, whatever they could, but, but it
was different, that, eh  how shall I say, no,  oh, the,  that was put, put, there wasn't anymore
and there was eh beating and shooting and plundering like before, but they did it there own way,
the Germans. Slowly, slowly they did it the same what the Russian did. But they were the, the masters.
We couldn't say no to them, you know. [sighs] It was a time  it wasn't easy.
Yes, very few people who can talk about this, two armies in one
In one place.
Yes. So that's why I'm asking you.
Yes.
You are a witness
Yes, I
of those events.
I was witness to that event, yes, yes, yes, yes. And a lot of the young people from   Siedliczcze probably,
not woman, but most eh young men, boys shall I call them, they went with the Russian army.
They went east?
They were east, yes, because they were hearing that the Germans mostly take the, the, the men
folk away and, and we never saw them again, they did the same thing. The Germans took a lot of
men folk away and then, once a German, that was the first winter, when a German soldier came in
on a motor bike and the, the, the, the  whole around us, everything, you know, was covered in
snow, he couldn't see the road, or, or the, the, the, the gutter, and he got with his motor
bike in a ditch or something and he killed himself and whatever, pardon me, he was killed. They
took a lot of people away and they came in to Siedliczcze and they took all the, the men, first
the Jewish men had to come out, every  tenth man was taken away and executed.
But when you talk about those men who went east, wa, are you talking about the Jewish inhabi, men of
Yes, Jew, Jewish
The Jewish
men.
So there were a lot of Jews who followed the Russians
Followed the Russian, yes, yes.
to go east.
to go east beause that what they, they were telling us, there were no escaped, you know, from
western Poland, from Austria, from Czechoslovakia, when the Germans came in. You know, mostly
they were concentrated what they doing to the men, so they escaped with the Russians.
Hmhm.
Yes, later on we got to know, for, eh, some eh, were somebody who was mein sister's
friend, you know, and he found his father there and eh this father was in Canada and,
and, and they didn't let him out from Russia, from the communist Russia and the Canadian,
or the father wanted to get his son out from the communist, they didn't allow it, but
they allowed the Canadian father to go to Russia to see his son. Yes.
So, the Russians left and a lot of Jewish men left to the east?
Not, not actually Jewish people from families, only younger, single men.
They went with the Russians east?
They went with the Russians, yes.
And they expected to be better there? Or safer?
I, I don't know. That might be, you know, but communist
never let anybody go, so it wasn't easy. You know.
And you, when did you meet for the first time a German in Siedliczcze?
The Germans in Siedliczcze?
Yes, when did you saw the, see the first German?
That was still September.
Yes?
Yes, maybe  I think it could have been maybe that eh, the third week in September. I don't
know, I can't remember. No. I only know when the Russian came in, that was the Rosj Hasjana,
I think it was the 18th of September. I'm not sure, but I think so.
I'm not asking you for data
No.
I'm asking for you, you  when did you've seen the first German soldier, how
In, in
how, how
Sep, September, in September.
but, but hów did you see him? Eh, was it in a bakery, was it in the garden?
No, they, they just marched in.
They marched in and you
Marched in
were looking?
yes. And we were still at home
Yes?
you know. So they, whatever my mum could speak very well German and my father couldn't,
but my mother could, because when my mother grew up, after First, before the First Worldwar
in, in Russia, she could speak French and German and Russian. She learned Polish from the
French alphabet, because the Germans had the Gothic and the Russian had the Cyrillic
Yes.
yes, but she learned Polish from the French alphabet.
Uhuh.
After the First Worldwar, so she could fluent three languages and Jiddisch [laughs].
Not to forget.
Yes, never forget it. Yes.
Jiddisch, that's also a language. Eh [scrapes throat], your family, eh, can you
talk a little bit, did you ever see non Jewish eh Poles, did you  meet them, or
Poi
what was your relation?
the relation we've had, my grandfather, my, from my father's family, he, they were living somewhere
else in Siedliczcze in m, m, more like the middle of the city, mein aunty she was a very famous dress
maker and my grandfather had somewhere like a shop with eh, where you can buy little things like
paper and ink and pens and pencils, what you hebe, hebedeciary, do you call that?
Yes, what
Something like that, but that was more in the middle, like in, you know, that, that was open for the
market place and all that and eh, what else can I mind,  Zelda's parents, that was, Zelda was my
second cousin, she, her parents had eh, me, a shop material where to buy, do you know, for, for clothing,
you know eh, in the middle there, their surname was Metz and eh was other family, you know, a lot,
a lot, eh, someone, the family were in different cities. I had family like in Chelm, my grandmother's
family and I had in Tomassovluensly , that's where my grandmother's eh son and daughter lives
there like my mother's eh brother and sister lived there. They were not all in Siedliczcze, they
were all scattered in Poland, you know, in different cities. You know, because eh  how shall I say,
I went to school, my, my mother's eh sister used to come for the Jewish holidays over from  Tomaszow
to us and she was a very good dress maker, so we used to wait for her to make us lovely dresses. And
even for her own wedding, when she was getting married, we, we were all having, my sister had a navy
blue with white and I had eh something a different color, but it was like eh sai, sailor clothes and
new shoes, eh, shiny shoes and new socks and all that. And before the wedding we were all dressed
up and mum said don't go outside because that particular time they were digging in Siedliczcze to
put new pipes in for water, I don't know what they were digging then. We were seven or nine years
old and mum said not to go close to there, but I wanted to have a look what's happening and I slipped
and my sister wanted to pull me out and she fell in too and we came back for the wedding all in mud.
And mum told us to stay in that room and never to come out. So that was the punishment because we
didn't listen.
Did, did you, did you have any contact with non Jewish, with the Poles?
Oh yes! Yes, yes, yes, yes.
That's my question.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Oh we lived in, the end of Siedliczcze were all our
neighbours were Polish neighbours, we never had the Jewish neighbours and
everybody across the road was eh  what was the name eh Roman eh, eh
you know, in, in a minute the name will come, eh, they had a very beautiful eh fruit eh
tree garden and his mother, he was a blacksmith. But this mother had a eh a flower garden
and all, you know, when in Poland the  Corpus Christi, you've heard about
Yes.
they had four stations of the cross and from their garden all the stations for a bit, for, those flowers
were made up the stations of the cross. And eh Roman eh, oh, what is the second name? It will come to
me  and he had, you know, in the back, you know, very, very fruit garden, we used to and help him pick
the apples, then we got the apples from them and even one day we saw grape fruit he had on the, the,
the back of a very big eh  sh eh garage or something, he had grapes growing and Zelda was there with
me and because she, we, we were the same age, and she was more at our place than at home because we
were living outside, not the middle and we picked the grapes and we brought them in and mum nearly fainted,
the grapes were not ripe and Roman knew how many bunges of grapes he had growing, put the grapes back,
but we were so lucky that particular day [laughs], there was a tool
Yes.
and the grapes that, that thing was torn of the  wall and some of the grapes were lying ripe
grapes them we picked were lying on the ground, so we were not [coughs], we were not punished.
But mum said don't you dare go there anymore and listen what you were told [laughs].
But you had good relations with
Very good, no, not all, all our neighbours, we remember them and, and the school girls and all that,
we always, they used to come over to our place on eh Pesach, they were always wanted to see what we
eat, the matzes and all that, so we invited them. Not only that, but we never went on Saturdays to
school and the Polish girls went to school, so we had our friends who gave us the homework, so we have
to, have the homework made for Monday morning when we go to school. And the school was about a kilometre
away from, from home. So in the summer we used to walk there, but in the winter my father had a sled
and a horse, so we used to gather all the children on the way, it was about a kilometre and he used
to take us all to school on the sled, but the horse knew the way [laughs], but he was taking us there.
And the school was such a beautiful place, it was a castle. That castle was given to the city because
he didn't have any heirs, so that particular castle was made up for the school. So you can imagine
how beautiful our school was. Every class had those beautiful high ceilings and all ceiling was decorated
and the heating was like white eh, eh what is it called eh  tiles,  white tiles and that was always
done that, that heating was in two rooms and one room he used to put in the, the wood and the coal
and it was closed after the smoke was gone, it used to closed up and that was heating for 24 hours.
So that the school was heating that way. And we had a very big assembles eh place in the, in the ...
all..was about a thou, thousand, in the morning there were the elderly, we had from, from se eh fifth,
from fourth, fifth and sixth class was going in the morning and the younger children were there  in
the afternoon. We had our classes from eight to one and eh there was about a thousand children in that
school. And the assemble hall, where every class was standing in that classes assemble, we had all
around the walls, was hangers with our name where we put our coats on, but the, the other things were
going in the classes and the teachers, they were Polish teachers. One I had, a Jewish teacher, but
she was teaching Polish, she was from Chelm [swallows], such a lovely woman. I still have got a picture
of her, you know.
You should show me later.
I will show it to you, you know, I've got them all, standing there.  And if not I've got the albums
and I'll show you all. She  was in the, for the Underground, for the Polish Underground. Because
her husband was a Polish officer. And she eh helped a lot with the Underground. And somebody put her
in and she was executed.  Yes, there was a lot, a lot to have to be careful to, when the Germans were
there, quite a long time.  And eh  her brother [swallows] survived the war. He was as a Polish worker
on the railways, but not an ordinary workers with the navy blue uniform, like, like  I don't know
what the work was on the, with the rail and all that. And he survived.
Hmhm.
And Zelda later on, I knew, knew the parents, they lived in Chelm and Zelda mar, married a man,
late cousin, she married him and I knew him very well too, before even, eh, you know, he, he
before the war, because he was mein eldest brother's friend, with another friend who lived in
Siedliczcze. It was all connected, you know, with, with Polish people and with eh, my father had,
had that many Polish friend, when the winter used to come, they used to play cards here, the,
the chief of police sitting with other people playing cards. Because wintertime was only time
to play cards and my mum had to, to, to bake eh certain things so they would have to eat and a
bottle of Wodka was on the table and sometimes they used to play cards till two or three o'clock
in the morning [laughs]. You know, so we had a lot of beautiful Polish friends. We were never
said go home or be cold, you know, that you, you were, we never had picket standing by, but Jews
in the big cities, we had them in Chelm and in Lublin, they were standing in front of Jewish shops
and buy only at Jewish places, but in, in Siedliczcze we never eh, eh, you know, lived through
that, we never had any enemies. The Polish people eh, eh
So that started with
and anti, antisemitism, we never knew about antisemitism in Siedliczcze.
Till the Germans came.
Till the Germans came. They sorted
And then you could not
they
go any longer to that
they, they sorted
beautiful school.
they sorted us out. And there was another thing. A lot of Polish friend might be, would have helped
a lot because a lot of them paid with their life. In Polish, when the Germans found a Jewish person
hiding in a Polish family, the whole Polish family was executed. You know about that. But in other
countries, like Czechoslovakia or other countries when the German did the Polish people were send
to concentration camp, they were not executed.  Only in Poland. That's why when you, when I went
to Israël [swallows] and I had a look at the Avenue of the Righteous the longest avenue was Polish
people who helped Jews. Because every name had a tree.  You know. You know that. You see that I'm
just didn't make it up, you know, that. How about we have a break?
Sure, that's what I was going to suggest.
there, it's all
Okay, Regina, can you go on?
Yes.
Where we had stayed is eh, the Germans were there
and you could not go to school any longer  eh
No.
and so one day you could not even go to your house anymore.
That was  eh when we were all assigned to work for that outside, it was about a kilometre
or more to walk to that river where we have to, to, to  to straighten it and that was, I think
I mentioned the date, that was the 18th of May, when it started with the ghetto.
But before that you had to work on the river, that was before the ghetto?
That was, yes, but, people still walking home every day when we finished work,
we were walking home, but the 18th of May we couldn't go home anymore.
You had to go to the ghetto.
We have straight, they have, during the day they did something,
cornered off quite a few streets  and that was the ghetto.
Can we before go to  the river? Can you describe me a day in which you worked at the river?
Yes. We had eh to assemble, but I can't remember exactly where everybody, because there were a
lot of people from different places, but we have to assemble at the river there, because we knew
where we were going and I think we were counted there is every, everybody there. I can't remember
that exactly, because sometimes, you know, I was walking with, with my parents and with my sister
and sometimes with other people, because we were assigned over there, at the spot where we were
working to different spots where that have to be, the engineer marked it out where it has to be
and there was a lot of Germans watching us too, not just eh, you know, that eh other, we, we, we
didn't have any foremens there. We didn't have anybody who would come and hurry up and do it,
we have to do that in a day, we were marked out for instance a square metre, I have to dig  and
that I have to do today and if it's done before, then I had to go and help out others. It wasn't
that we were told hurry up and do it, we didn't have that when we were coming from home to work.
And everybody was fifteen and over had to, to assign for work.
Also your mother and father?
Yes. Yes.  Only my grandmother and greatgrandmother, they were staying home. And then one day, I don't
know how that came about [swallows] that meine grandmother and greatgrandmother and they eh neighbour,
a very good friend of my grandmother, Mrs Carp, they, they predicted something was going to be happening
today and they didn't want to go home, but my father has, has made a eh a double eh wall in one of
the sheds where the material, the building material was and that was, it didn't look like it's a
separate wall, because that was done up like the outside wall with straw because for the winter that's
had to be protected and eh they  hi, were hiding there. Because they couldn't go to work, they were
too old for work. But normally they stayed at home and now, and n, nothing was happening, but that particular
day, I don't know what it was, that they, they were hiding, I can't recall why. And then they, they
c, we couldn't go back home that particular day, that was the 18th of May. And when we came back
[sighs] it was something that is hard to describe, we were giving outside  eh, it was still  Siedliczcze
but it was more outside, a little cottage where a tailor lives, and there was only two people in that
little cottage and the tailor because he had that room to do the sowing, all our family was  in there.
And my grandmother was with us.
She had come from the old house?
No, from that, from the normal house, you know, because she was hiding. All the, oh,
I forgot to tell you. The one who were not that particular day at work, were taken away.
All the sick, all the young who couldn't work, the children, a lot of children were
left with their grandparents and the young was going to work, they were taken away that
day. And nobody saw them anymore. Where they were taking nobody knew.
But your grandmother managed to escape?
Managed to, the, my greatgrandmother she was with, with eh somebody else then, that particular day,
but I don't know [swallows] how to explain that. Because they were different places where the,
the people could be, oh,  could be assembled and my grandmother was still with us in that cottage,
but I don't know where greatgrandmother went. To somebody else's eh place there were more room
maybe, but still in the ghetto.  And that was something that eh was hard to describe. To leave a
beautiful big house and to be squeezed in  in a small place like that.  It had, no, it was still
summer because May just started, on the spring, and we were there till [swallows] even, till October
the 22nd. But in the meantime my eldest brother passed away, whenever
Yes, you told so.
they was, and that was the, the, eh   Rosj Hasjana eve. The 11th of September. And, by cleaning
the bricks from the synagogue because they burned down the synagogue. And they were even stand against
laughing, and the [Jews] were standing, we couldn't do anything. And they took all the jews together
in the middle of the synagogue and lit them and they were laughing that nobody managed to, they
said what Jews are they, yet, that you don't go to save your scrolls. They meant the Thora's.
You know. How could anybody jump into a f, middle of a fire to save them.
But that day you didn't have to work? Because you did see that?
Yes, we were working. We were working during the day and that was in the evening.
That was in the evening?
In the evening they burned the synagogue down. Yes.
Hmhm.
And later on mine eldest brother was assigned to clean the bricks, that was in September.
You know. I don't know exactly what month and when the synagogue was
That doesn't matter.
was, but, burned.
Doesn't matter.
It was between the 18th of May  till September when my brother passed away, that was already
burnt down. Because there were four of them, were cleaning the bricks from young men.  And
Was it very hard work?
It was a very hot day and all that to sit outside in the sun and we had only something
to eat in the morning and during the work there wasn't any break. And w, and when
we were working with the, the river digging, it wasn't so bad because it wasn't
that hot, but they were sitting, the men were sitting, the young men were sitting
and cleaning bricks and a ver, it was a very hot September day. Yes.
When you say it wasn't so bad with the water digging
No, but
I imagine you were fifteen years old
Yes, yes.
so it must have been very hard work for a small girl
It was h, it was hard, but sometimes, you know, when you get a sandy, sandy place, it wasn't
that hard, we didn't have to every, maybe to go that deep, it all depends, somet, my dear eh
Selma, we were helping out one another. It wasn't that, that it was a s, not like in a camp,
it was just coming out from home to do the work and we had to do that today and if eh was somebody
got something harder, so the other person who had a little bit lighter went to help. So that was
done today. Yes. And eh that was why, you know, that engineer, he was so fair. With
He was?
the work. He was very fair with work. You know. And it was still summertime, so we never worried,
even if we stand in water or not. But it was different  when you sit all day and clean bricks.
Absolutely!
Yes.
So people helped each other and  at the digging and the waterworks?
Yes they would, yes, the, the, the
Did you get any food during the day?
No, we, we didn't, oh no, if you bring something from home
Yes?
yes, then, then we had something to eat, but we, we still had, you know,
it wasn't rationed then, even, you know, we were not in ghetto then,
but later on in ghetto it wasn't so easy. It wasn't so easy.
Because you were hungry?
[whispers] Oh yes. But my mother saw, my, I don't know how she managed, you know, after
work she, she was crawling into the garden and picking some vegetables and something and
all away, she not, didn't take long, you know, a pot of soup for the, even there wasn't
much to put in, but pepper maybe and salt, but there was something to eat, you know. A
potatoe and a carrrot and then maybe, I don't know what else, a bean, whatever it was
growing, we all helped, you know. And there was still enough bread.
Was it far away?
Eh to, to work?
Yes.
About a kilometre. Sometimes a bit more, sometimes less.
It all depends how the river was flowing. Yes.
So that's okay.
Yes, that was okay. Yes. We've used to walk. You know.  But later on when it got colder
it wasn't so easy. The worst part was in that slave lamber, labour camp in Staw. Because
we were taking away from Siedliczcze the 22nd of October. And October is late autumn.
Yes.
That was starting to get cold. And in November sometime the eh it was freezing.  That was hell!
In Staw you wouldn't come home again? You would stay there?
Pardon?
When you worked in Staw. Did you  enter  come back home in the evening or?
No, not home. No. To the g, ghetto.
To the ghetto, yes.
To the ghetto, yes. Yes, from Staw we were coming home from, from the ghe, from work to the ghetto.
And was that further away?
No the ghetto was outside eh of Staw, yes.
Yes?
No, sorry, sorry, we did come home from the ghetto.  We were taking away [swallows] to Staw the 22nd
of October and it was a camp there. That was a very old mill, was converted, they were making in that
mill eh  eh, eh banks   banks  and they were straw on the bank  on the thing and we were  getting some
blankets, that was all. But it was already so cold and the work outside all day. But my mother was assigned
to the kitchen. So eh you know sometimes you know, when we finished there was soup, but the soup where
they were putting in oats in the soup, and potatoes. And mum used to say be careful when you eat the
soup because the, the oats were not cleaned like we have now porrigde from oats, the, the oats were
just crushed and the  was still on it. So she used to say be careful when you eat and if you get some
potatoes in it, you might be even better to wash off  the soup from the potatoe because if a  gets stuck
in the throat it's worse than a bone, you can't get it out.
Yes.
So we had to be so careful with the soup when we were having it. But that was in Staw, when we arrived
in Staw there wasn't anymore like in the ghetto, it was the mill. And there was three or two, three
wire fences all around and there was eh, eh Germans with dogs. We had to give up our clothes to be desinfectant,
but we were wearing it and we were getting it back and then  every day to work, with in the morning a
slice of bread and eh as eh a  of hot water. They called it coffee, it was brown water, but we were happy
it was hot. And then when we were coming back was the soup. And that where my  mother was then assigned
to, in the kitchen. Not to go to work, but my father was still coming all of us, the family. Only not
my eldest brother. He p, he passed away in September.  I remember I had a dream about him. And, and eh,
eh, I, I complained that much and even mum said you don't have to worry about it, we know where he
is and that what he, he said in the dream. You never know where you are going.  The certain things you
know, I used to have dreams, I wish I had dreams now, but I don't dream now. Maybe I do, but I don't
remember when I wake up. I had once a dream that my mother, we were in a very, very big hall and my mother
was coming in from the rain, she had a raincoat with a hood on. And she came in, I knew she wasn't
alive with us and I went over to her and ask her mum where ever you are, is it very hard, very bad? And
she said my daughter, we have to earn, we have to work everywhere to earn our place.  I wish I could
say it in a bit of Jiddisch, in a bit of Polish, the way she was talking in that dream. When I talk to
you I still can see her.
Can you tell in Jiddish?
Oh we used to speak a lot of Jiddish.
No, but can you tell me now what she
No
said to you, in Jiddish?
no, no, because I tried to get the Jiddish language out when I was in German, because
I was afraid it will come up in Jiddish and they will recognise me that I'm, I'm
Jewish, so I just wanted so quickly to learn German and now when I want to speak Jiddish
it comes out German. But Jiddish songs I still remember. Yes.
But when you talk about your mother ta, talking to you
can you say it to me in German then?
In German she said Mein Tochter, eh, eh we, we have,
no, you see, it comes in, in English  I, Ich, Ich
Wir haben
Wir müssen  no I cannot
Unsere Stelle verdienen onder so etwas?
something like that, Wir, Wir müssen verdienen eh unser, unser Leben or our, our, it's something
you know, but I still can see her when she said eh we have to earn our  maybe it was different,
because I still can see her in, in, in that grey raincoat.  Anyhow [sighs].
Your father was older and he had to work also in the waterworks?
No, he wasn't much older, he was only three years older than
my mother. My mother was 42 and my father was 45 when we got
But for a man of 45
five, yes
to work in the water
Yes?
that kind of hard labour must have been
Every, everybody
different.
you know. And my sister, she was only eighteen months older than I was. And the
youngest brother he was hiding. He was hiding in, in Staw, he was hiding.
Explain to me
I don't know
how could he do it?
I d, I don't know how he did it, but he found a kettle, a, you know when you boiled water for tea
or something and he used to fill it up behind, it was still the camp, but behind that mill he found
a place where he could gather eh dry pieces of wood if it was cold, it wasn't always raining, it
wasn't always snowing, it was October, and he used to lit the fire when he said mum, nobody can
see me and he used to boil water in that kettle  and he was only eleven years old and then we came
back from work so we had some hot water, before we got that little  bit of soup.
Did you sleep with the family in Staw?
Yes. Yes.
You had a corner in the
No, the men were separate from the woman, but we was on eh, we used to call it Pritze
Yes?
Yes, and that was  so we used to huddle together so we had another blanket, because we had to cover
the snow with one blanket, the straw, with one blanket and cover ourselves on with another one.
Hmhm.
You know. I had, still had my coat, my mother had a winter, winter stuff on thanks to that engineer.
We got a lot of winter stuff out from the, from home, because we still had it in Siedliczcze where
we were working. In ghetto. So we had a lot of winter stuff with us. And that saved us a lot.
The engineer was Polish or German?
Polish engineer, Polish. Kiendracki. Yes, he was a, and the two girls, the, the, the Irene, Irene
and Myszka, she was the daughter of a eh Polish senator.  W, w, not Wisotsky eh  Wasynczuk.
Hmhm.
You see, if I try I remember the name, Wisotsky was somebody else. Yes. Two sisters. They were
lovely girls, that sister helped me later on a lot. When I was escaping. That will come.
[coughs] So eh  it was a rough life in Staw? It was very hard?
Very hard because it was cold. Terribly cold.
And you ?
Yes. And there's another incident, but that was already wintertime. That was already in December.
It was snowing and on Sunday we never used to go to work. Saturday sometimes only half a day. And Sundays
not, we had to clean up the camp.  And the whole world was covered in snow and it looked like a picture
card, you know. The wintertime. And we were outside and then we saw outside one of the fences two black
dots. And the dots were coming closer and closer [scrapes throat] and when they were very close we heard,
we saw it was two boys. Crying and calling out for their mother. Because their mother and father was
in the camp [coughs], oh pardon me [scrapes throat] but their grandfather was one of the highest decorated
Polish soldier for the First Worldwar,  and he, they had a very, the, the government gave him a very
good position. He had the, the  where they eh have spirits and wine to sell, because that was under
government law, nobody can have it, that in private. And that was the grandson's twins, eight years
old twins for that and the parents were already in Staw working. And when they were close enough, we
recognised and the parents recognised them. And one of the SS-men or German, I don't know if he was
SS or just a soldier, he took out  the German sheperd, what you, they were circling the camp around
and I don't have to paint you the picture what they did to the two boys. And we couldn't help.
Oh gosh, that was something that it's hard to and describe.  Mother was behind and my sister were
behind and we looked at each other  I don't know if I said it or my sister said it, if they can do
that to two children  what can we expect from them for us?  The things we never get any  answers for
that. Because later on on life I had hear a professor who was teaching in Adelaide University religion
and Jewish religion and he was a doctor, professor doctor and all that and we were very good friends
and we used to talk a lot and one day he said, everything what happened in our life is for a purpose.
And I said, doctor, and I forgot his name, I've got his address there, tell me, was the Holo, what
purpose was the Holocaust?  And he said I don't have an answer for that.  There isn't any answer
for that. No. The only thing was annoyed us and that much was to the rest was doing nothing. Roosevelt
knew about it since 1942  because we after the war, in the museum, in Sydney Jewish museum we had newspapers,
the New York Times, the Chicago, what was it, Chicago's newspaper, anyhow, you know what I mean, it
was the heading, was 1942, what they were doing, what Hitler is doing to the Jews and Roosevelt said
don't worry we are going to win, to win the war. And that was three more years of war when he said
that.
But when you were there  you had no news about the war?
No, no, no.
Because this is after Stalingrad.
Yes.
So the German were losing the war already.
But you didn't, you didn't know about Stalingrad?
I didn't know. No. No. But when the eh transport of the Russian prisoners of war, Jewish prisoners
of war, they were still in the uniform, that was the 23rd of September nineteen fourty
three.  And then they were telling us  that they are losing the war. And we
can't wait any longer because we'll be all killed. Pechersky helped
Yes, but that's later on.
helped us. Yes.
Let's, do you mind to go back to Staw, because it must have been unbearibly cold!
It was hard to describe.  I don't know, please don't ask me, how we survived, because
sometimes we used to say it was too much to die and not enough for living, I mean the food.
We used to pray nothing much but the daily bread, you know, how we, we, we pray, our father,
you know, the prayer might be in Jiddish, is not like that because we used to pray it in,
in Hebrew and I did, didn't understand Hebrew, so I liked to pray it in, in Polish, our
father, you know, it is exactly the same word that is in English, you know. All we were asking
was our daily bread, nothing else.  Because bread was so holy in camp.
But it must also have been very dirty? Dirty
Yes.
you must have become very dirty.
Did you still have your period then, or?
No I had, didn't have the period for about eight months. It stopped.
Hmhm.
Yes. I don't know, and because eh that stopped so I used to get boils all over me.
And standing in the water and that cold, cold sinc and all that, I don't know how my
mother see how we were suffering, how she survived.  My father was a strong man.
He was?
Yes.  Even my brother after me, he, even if he was a lot younger, he was stronger than, than maybe
I was, I don't know. I  the size I'm today I think I didn't grow since I was twelve. I've got
here in Australia a good excuse, I was born in a small country, not in a continent [laughs].
Okay. How did you learn you had to move from Staw?
We were told
Yes?
in the morning that we are not going to work and, and a lot of farmers have assembled with wagons
and eh horsedriven wagons and they were eh women with, with a little bit, sisters are eh you know,
daughters were sitting on a certain wagons and the men were separate on other wagons. And we were
told that we are going to another camp.  And where we were going they never told us.
Yes, that's how you started talking this interview,
when you said when the, you took the road to Wlodawa
To Wlodawa, yes.
you realised that
Yes, not we realised the, the brother said something.
Yes.
Let's say goodbye to the night because we won't see the sunrise. Yes. But we,
we never be, couldn't understand what he was saying, what it meant. Yes.
So, since you started talking about how you  elected yourself for knitting
Yes.
you already told that, eh  you landed up at this shed in Sobibor for knitting.
And that's where we had gone to and then, since that we have come back.
No.
You remember?
Where, what is
How the interview went? You started the interview with the knitting room.
Knitting room, yes.
And so, let's pick up from there again.
Yes, from there, yes, alright, then we were knitting, we had to do, first of all they brought,
they b, eh fixed up the, the barrack for us and a very big table and chairs and they brought,
they gave us a potbelly little stove and they gave us one bucket of fuel, some wood to start and
then coal and we used to keep that for the evening because that, the evening was the coldest and,
and then we could knit a little bit from the, when they, curfew was at eight o'clock so they
switched off the light. Sometimes it was impossible to do one sock, we had to undo beautiful cardigans
and jumpers and they were from all over Europe, you know, and then we had to, from that wool we
had to knit a sock a day. Some of us were doing fast the leg and some of us could do better the
heel or the, the toes, so we used to, to, how shall I say, help ourselves out, so that we haven't,
we had to have a half a dozen socks in the morning.
Did you always manage
Eh we managed, because the, the flicker of the  from the fire, when the light was switched off and when
we had that little potbelly for the eh night, so we had a little bit warm where to sleep. And there was
another thing, there were twelve of us in all because there was a real young girl, Irene, she did a lot
of help with her mother and her brother, they were knitting and  they had to undo first, we all helped,
we all helped each other. We just didn't think you can or you can't, we have to do it. And whatever
it was possible to do it in a way that what we were trying to do and then [swallows] eh when the, the,
the socks were ready in the morning, they used to count, that's another thing, there was only three
or four of us, because it was three layers and I was assigned to the top thing in the, the, the  the
roof from the barrack, was like that. And it didn't have a ceiling. So if I have meine toes there,
meine toes were freezing and if I had meine head there on the end, you know, there, meine head was freezing.
So the girls made room, another three to fit in on the, on the first or the second one, so we were just
packed in like, like eh  sardines, no [laughs], no
Yes
hard to, yes
Yes.
yes, but we managed, nobody was on top, it was impossible in the winter.
Because the roof was not really closed.
No, that roof was closed but it wasn't a ceiling. And the, the
roof was covered with, eh, what is that, that iron called?
Straw?
Co eh, eh  how, cord
Cardboard?
you know, that, that, that roof cover, what is that eh  iron, iron roof
I understand.
an iron roof.
An iron roof, yes.
Yes. Yes. And that was colder than wood or anything else. You know. In the winter. But we managed somehow
to do it and we even managed to knit something else and, they, which I want German is not supposed to
know from another and we ask you know to, and only once was somebody brought in maybe a slice of bread,
was someone, one German brought in some sugarcubes, but what do you do with, so I hid mine in a little
pocket I had there and eh  anyhow, that was something, but that was from the sowing room when I was [swallos].
And when the knitting, shall I tell when the knitting finished or shall we still do the knitting during
the winter. And in spring  the knitting was finished.  We were assigned to different work.  First I think
was assigned to the forest. Because the men was cutting off branches so a horseman can ride through the
forest and we had to take the branches away into the camp. They needed that wood for the crematorium.
And eh then, after that we were assigned, there were little bunkers in the forest and there was only
the roof was sticking under, were two steps to go down, or three, and there was Russian ammunition that
they, from the Russian front, what they, the Germans eh, because in the beginning the Russians was losing,
so they had the Russian ammunition there, we had to clean that. And then sometimes we had to unload other
things and other things and then I was taking to the sorting eh garage. And the sorting was the clothing.
Everything good has to be sorted out different. And that was going straight to Germany. They'd showed
us how to, to rip up the bundles, the good stuff. And they had three or four glass containers on a separate
table. And when you find money or goods, whatever it was hidden and we were finding it, we had to put
it in there. If you hide it, you get shot on the way, on the, on the  that's got, for the Germans.
And then was eh, when, where I was doing that, there was a brought onto the table a bundle  and I n,
nearly froze, standing looking at it and the girls ask what's happening to you? That brown jack, jacket
that is my mother's jacket. A winter jacket.  Oh she said don't be, I said it in, in English, don't
be  your transport was in December and it's now May, it wouldn't lay here about there that long.
I said I can prove it to you. My mother hid, there was a breast pocket on each side, she p eh hid her
wedding ring in the lining.  I said if you will watch out for me and I'm strong enough  and even when
I'm not strong enough, we always had sci, scissors lying about because we were ripping up the bundles,
we had to cut off the strings and things like that, and I'll rip off the lining on the pocket and you
will see there's my mother's ring there. And it was my mother's jacket. I couldn't give up that
ring. But the floor boards were not close by, it was eh, eh a distant from one board to the other, I
could fit meine toes into the sand because the board were lying on sand. And I fit on and I dropped that
ring and covered it up in the sand. I didn't give it up. I couldn't hide it with me, if they would
have found it, I would have been shot.  But I couldn't give it up.-
Did you have a phantasy to find it?
Oh how, meine dear
Yes.
Selma, how, we never been back, never been back to Sobibor. And Sobibor,
the Germans  dugged everything up and they even, you know, they planted
tr, a new forest, you know. They, it, it was imp, maybe somebody
sp SL I know, I know.
maybe somebody found it, but not me and not, nobody from us
went ever back during the war when, you know, they, they
No, but, but I'm asking when you hid the ring
The ring, yes.
did you then have a fantasy to  be ever able to dig it up again, or?
I never dreamed I would pick it up again, but I didn't give it up to the Germans.
Okay.
Whatever will find it, good luck to them. You know. But not to give it up,
that would have gone straight with other jewelry to Germany. You know.
Hmhm.
I never, never dreamed about it. Anyhow. What they, they, when we escaped, what
they did to that camp, later on I found out, I didn't know it straight away.
It must have been a terrible confrontation suddenly with the jacket of your mother.
Oh I knew I
Because you must have missed her so much.
I knew, I knew what was, I knew what happening to the family, but now I have her clothing
in meine hand  was a, a woolen, even  the lable for that, the, the tailor who made it was
Offenbach from Lublin.  You know. It was a beautiful winter jacket, it was lined and in
between the lining there was still warm stuff in there. Like our coats, the winter coats
had inside like, like felt or something very light stuff. But in layer, before the lining,
so it will be warm. You know, it wasn't, the winters were not like here.
No.
Yes. We needed the warm stuff. Anyhow, and then [swallows]  just as well  the 23rd of September
did the Russian transport came in.  And amongst them was a lieutenant with the name Alexander
Pechersky and we called him Sascha. In Russia Alexander they call Sacha.
Sascha, yes.
Yes. Even he, but he was seeing and hearing what was going on, he said eh that he's got a three
years old daughter in Russia [swallows], he himself was a music teacher. But in the army he was
lieutenant. And there was a lot of other Russian soldiers with him. And we already had in the camp
somebody with the name of ehLeon Feldhendler. And they were, he and other m, men were planning,
because one escaped, we had to pay a very high price. If they caught that one, then or a dozen
others were shot from the camp and the ones who were, you know, it was hard to describe, and we
said either, ei we go all or not at all. And that was, Pechersky helped out because he had a lot
of military experience. And then it started. It started, it started and we were always waiting
for Wagner. I never told you about what I lived through in the camp.
Tell me.
[sighs] I was working in, in a, a laundry.  And I wasn't well, I had a terrible headache and it
wasn't a headache you know, it was a earache. A middle ear infection, I know now what it was, but
then I didn't know. And maybe I was just standing and waiting for the hot water, maybe that was
my excuse, because I needed a little bit of warm  for my hands. And I wasn't eh, make myself working,
I was standing, I don't know what happened with me then. And the German came in. One of the guards,
I think his name was Kam [spells] K A N, A M. And he said, because I wasn't working, he took me
out, outside and that particular day Wagner, he was the most ferocius be, no I shouldn't call him
beast, because a beast doesn't kill for nothing, it's either they defend themselve or they are
hungry, but he was killing people for nothing, to, took me out and Wagner had just standing there
with his dog, and  a pile of wood the men was shopping the wood, and that was about that high, a
pile of wood and he told him that I wasn't working, he told me to bend down and then even told
me to lift my skirt up.  And they had the, the whips, about a meter long  anyhow, you to, sh, cut,
I remember where I finished, you are too tired.
No.
No?
No!
Oh.
I'm listening. Verry attentively.
And eh he started to hit me, but I didn't scream. And the, the boys, you know, couldn't understand,
I don't know how many, I never counted, it could have been ten or more, but each time the whip
came along to the front I had blisters on my stomach. And then he told to the guy, guard, take her
back to the laundry and the girls wanted to help me and cold compresses, I couldn't sit, I couldn't
lie and my head was nearly bursting. And we had a nurse from  Czechoslovakia, a man, if somebody
just had an accident at work, cut himself, not, not to be sick, because they didn't need sick people,
that's why I couldn't tell anybody, but that could eh Thomas, was his name, and he said we, we
had, and the camp we had a dentist. And he said he will talk to the dentist, maybe he'll be able
to help me. Because my hea it was so terribly painful.
A middle ear infection is horrible!
It's worse than toothache. And, and he talked to the dentist, he said after the rollcall before eh
before they switched off that we have to be in the baracks and all that, he will try to have a look,
he might be able if he had the torch, to might be able to pierce through my ear drum.  And he managed.
He had pieces of cotton wool, everything that had to be so discretely done, so anybody from the inmates
wouldn't see it because they might talk about it and somebody will hear about it. And that was such
a relieve. It was running and running and running, you know. But the pressure was gone.  And  it didn't
take long [swallows] I felt a lot better, but I was at the laundry and all day long in the laundry
with those, with the water, the steam and the, I couldn't  and it happened to have a dream that my
ma was at home, we had a very big apple tree. And under the apple tree were seats. And like a little,
you know where we, we could sit in a little, my father made it all, and I was sitting there and my
mum came home with my two youngest brother from school, they were still in their school uniform because
the kids at Poland they were wearing knitted  tops,
Yes.
uniform, you know, and I complaint that much to my mama said if I won't get any help I won't last
much longer, could you help me. She said don't worry, I'll send you my sister, she will help you.
I woke up, I don't know it was next morning or a morning after, I was in the laundry and Scharführer
Frenzel came into the landry. And he ask who can sow men shirts?  I said I can only saw collars and cuffs,
I can't put the shirt together. That's what he need, there's somebody else in the German sewing
room who can sow the, put the shirt together. He says dry  yourself up so you wouldn't come into the
sewing room wet  or whatever he explained to me, anyhow, the next morning he came in and he took me to
the sowing room. Mein dear, dear Selma  that was from hell to heaven.
Really?
Because can you imagine to sit in a dry place, near a sewing machine and do things, not just shirts,
we were doing that many different thing, because the, our, our  eh  lady who was doing all that,
she was an artist, she looked at something and she can cut it out and make it. We had to do that
many different things, dressing up dolls, I was doing the beginning the cuffs and the collars and
not somebody else, we were four in the sowing room, and we would, used to monogram handkerchiefs
for the, and, and all the lingery for hi, for the, for the Germans. And
You were working for the Germans
All for the German, that was in the German quarter, not in that place where we were living. That
was different. And eh after, when the rollcall came on a German was coming, take us out for the
rollcall, because we were, have to be counted. I didn't have far to go to the, to the, because
that was only one eh  division, one fence between camp and camp. Not the outside camp, the outside
fences had three wires for the sec, the third there were mines all around. You can't escape.
And that wasn't, mines you know, in the middle. And eh  that had helped me that much and I interpret
that my mother told me she's sending me help. And that was the help.
So the conditions were much, much better in the
Oh, the sowing
new place?
the sowing room was so beautiful! Beautiful sowing machines and the materials
what we were doing and you know sowing, it was su, can you imagine to dress
up dolls?  Or to monogram hankies? And to s, do lau, lingery?
That's for the families, yes?
All where they were going and leave, they used to take that home with them. Yes.  And a lot of
And did you also sleep there, or did you sleep in
No, no, no, no.
you were
After work, when everybody finished the work from the other places, we used
to come in to the camp and we were sleeping, that was the rollcall, we were
counted and then let go to have our evening meal. A little bit of soup.
So that part of life was not different from the other prisoners?
No, no. No, not different, but it was lighter for me, that was something that I can't
explain.  To sit all day and dry stuff and I wi, I never felt hungry there. Never.
Well, you ate the same as the eh, the other inmates.
Pardon?
You, you, you also used the same kitchen as the other inmates, or did you get extra?
No, no, no, like the other, after work. For instance when the bells were ringing for instance
at five o'clock, we finished in the sowing room and a German took us in where the rollcall
was and after, you know, we had to be counted, we were together with the other inmates.
But still you were not hungry?
But
Because the other's were hungry. That's what you always say.
Yes, ah, but when I was working with the sowing, I was never hungry.
I didn't feel the hunger. Because I wasn't working so hard.
Oh, exactly!
Yes.
So you needed less?
I needed that, that rest, I would not have survived in the laundry.
Yes.
With all that, that, in my head and all that, I was so worn out I couldn't,
couldn't survive much longer. And that was the help my mother send me.
Yes. How would you interpret it? Tell me. A different way.
That dream, with your mother?
Yes. She told me she was going to se, send my sister to help me. And that was Frenzel.
You never know about dreams.
No.
You never know
where they come from.
Where they come from, what they, what they are, what they meant. And all that.
Why you dream.
Yes.
How you make an interpretation
Yes
you never know.
yes. Yes I, how I interpret it. Yes.
So I can't answer your question.
[laughs]
But eh you all were thinking about escaping. Did you know that Feldhendler was
Yes we knew, but it was all hush hush. Because us woman, we couldn't help much, it was all about
the men. And then when, when Pechersky was there and we were waiting that Wagner goes on leave,
because he would have sniffed it out, and eh the commandant was Reichleitner, Franz Rechleitner,
he was the commandant, but he didn't have much to do with  very seldom used to see him, and he
was going on leave and somebody else, eh Frenzel took over and another one, that second in charge
of the commandant was Niemann, but he was always on his horse, he didn't have much, you know,
the others were more, you know ferocious, but nobody was like Wagner.  And he, he
Because Wagner
wa, was go
really found out everything.
he would have sniffed it out straight away. You know,
we couldn't, couldn't hide anything from Wagner.
Did he have so many spies or?
I don't know what he had. Because they were Ukrains a lot, but Ukrains were not in
the camp, on eh the towers. And arount the camp and all that. Whatever happened to the
Dutch workers we never knew, we never could find out. They were taking away, I think
there was a, I don't know exactly, somebody told me there was about seventy.
Dutch workers?
Dutch workers just in the camp. They were taking away and we never saw them back or the
So that they, all at the same time?
when I was there, yes. Yes.
Suddenly the Dutch were taken away?
Yes. Nobody knows where they were taken to another camp, nobody knew why they were taking out, later
on after the war maybe, the men maybe have sniffed it out where, but utch, us woman, we never had to
do anything with that. The only thing I'll never forget, when Pechersky, when, when they sniffed out,
you know, Frenzel first, and that something is happening in camp, when he went in, Bauer,  Scharführer
Bauer came back  from the third camp with a truck. And that truck had to be unloaded.  And Frenzel was
outside to help and to look for wo, for workers, because that was almost finished for work and he went
in to the office where the telephone was. And the telephonist, that, eh what was his name, the oberscharführer
oh gosh, I forgot. Never mind. He was lying under the table. Dead.
And there was a hand of blood on the door, on the door post.  That was eh Engel  and a lot
of other eh, they were called in to the workshops to try on a coat and they never walked out
alive. And they, they, they, a lot of other try on shoes, I don't know how many got killed
like that. Maybe ten, maybe less, maybe more. After the war I found out a lot because I wasn't
there, you know, I wa, I run away to Germany [laughs]. And then, then
But
when
did you, did you, were you prepared that this was going to
A night before, the men told us if you have spare clothing, put it on, but not that much that it will
be noticeable for sudden you got big. I still had my coat, I was sleeping on mein coat.  And I put it
on, and when we, they were coming back from work, that what they have assembled to and I only had to
come in from the sewing room there, but they weren't, the, here, here was the main gate.
Hmhm.
We were living there. The sowing room was there. And they were coming from work to assemble there.  And
I had to come in to assemble with them. But when they were assembled and that something started with
eh Frenzel found that eh  dead man under the table and Bauer was, and then the alarm was risen and the
shooting started from the towers, and Frenzel was shooting and all the others were shooting and  mayhem
on the camp, we didn't, didn't know where to run, but there were men who had some tools and they
made some openings in the, in the  in the wire. And I didn't have to walk far to that opening and I
got out. But [swallows] they were shooting from everywhere. And I wasn't afraid anymore, if I get shot
that will be a peaceful death that I don't have to go the gaschambers. But I managed to get out. Outside.
From the camp. And there was a lot of people who were running outside like that, because, oh we couldn't
march out the main gate, the main gate didn't have any, any mines, mines only around the camp. So that's
why we couldn't walk out the main gate anymore when the shooting started.  And I still can see myself
and hear myself in, on top of everything, there were trees, logs I would think, from about a kilometre
long forest, the trees were cut down and they were lying and we had to jump over them and there were
mines.  Anyhow, it  and Pechersky was near, not near the gate because we couldn't go near, he was standing
there when ev, everybody tried to get away. And he got everybody for themselves, but he said remember
if only one survived, to tell the story, our escape is going to be a success. How can you forget that,
tell me. You can't.
He was such a strong man huh, clearly?
We were all strong. And everybody maybe were thinking the same as I was thinking. But I managed to
get away. And I was running and running and running. But one thing I must tell you. You might believe
me or not, I stopped for a second and I get a deep breath  and it was so lovely to breath free air.
Not camp air. And I said I don't care if I get shot.  Really, I didn't care then.
I understand.
And when we got to the, the forest  there were two more people there, I
said where is everbody? And you know who was there?  My cousin Zelda.  And
the man Simon Rosomovitz from Warsaw.  [sighs] Now, shall we stop?
Yes. I was just suggesting.
I don't know it where I finished.
No. I want we, just discussed that we are going to, to
To the, the
with the question how  did you escape from Sobibor and become Regina Wojciszyn.
No eh when I finished was when I just get to the, the, out to the forest.
Absolutely.
And there was Zelda there, my late cousin, second cousin and that Simon Rozomovitz from Warsaw. And
we made ourselve to walked and walked and walked and we couldn't find a way out, but we saw eh like
eh the farmers, we went there, we knocked at the door and we told him who we we, who we are and he took
us in, want to give us something to eat and we thanked him very, very much, because we can't eat much,
but his wife cooked very quickly a potatoesoup and that was allright with us. And we went into his barn,
you know, before I couldn't remember that word barn, where he had the straw and he dugged out a very
big hole, so three people will fit in there. And we were all wet because it was raining when we arrived
there and we took or whatever we could, and he put on top a little pipe so we can have the air coming
in. And three of us were hiding in the barn, in that big, big mountain of straw. And next morning we
heard German voices. And the Germans were coming in to look for escapees with pitchforks. But the pitchfork
didn't reach us. And we stayed there another two days and then [swallows] Zelda said I know somebody
in Wlodawa. We found out how far from there to Wlodawa, it wasn't too far, we had the secretary of
the mayor in Wlodawa was our best friend. And, and she said I'll better go because all three of us
will be too much. She will go and find out for maybe he can make us some papers. We didn't have much
money, money at all, only Rozumovicz had some Polish money and maybe he had something else, I don't
know what he has and what he didn't and she left the, the next morning. She went to Wlodawa and we
never saw her again. We were very worried. And I said to Simon let's go and see where Zelda disappeared.
I will leave you in the forest and I will go to Wlodawa and find out what happened. And, but we had
a little bit a incident, you know, going there, it wasn't so easy with the farmer and all that, but
that I would go in to, to tell about anymore. And I went, left Simon in the forest and I made a good
mark where he is, because it was a young, young pineforest, forest and he had to lie down, he couldn't
even stand up there, he couldn't stand up. And I made, made my way to Wlodawa. I went to the main
road from the forest and I didn't know which way to go, right or left. But a young man was coming
on the, it was on the road and he was he, he, eh carrying a scythe on it, because it was a farmer's
son or something. And I ask him would you know which way I have to go to Wlodawa? Where, which way is
it? He said I'm going that way and I'll show you. But when we were walking, both of us already we
heard from the forest Germans were there, with machine guns and one was even calling out so, so early
in the morning you  like eh, you know, and didn't answer because I  you know, didn't understand
or whatever, I know what they were talking. Anyhow when he, when we parted he told me that is where
you go to, to Wlodawa, to the city. And I walked in there and I didn't know where to turn, I couldn't
ask anybody where the Golebiowski's  live. And I would, little children were playing hopscotch and
I just bent down and I said,  would, could, would you know where mister and mrs Golebiowski in Polish
you know, the, oh he said just the second house there. There was, somebody was always in front of me
showing me the way. I walked in there and mrs Golebiowski was there.-
And she said Zelda was here and she left for  his father, and his father has a very big farm outside
Siedliczcze and we know, I knew him maybe better than the Zelda knew, knew him and [swallows] she left,
she went there. So she said but before you go outside, she made, gave me something to eat and she made
a sandwich for Simon, because he is in, in the forest and she said, you know wash yourself and brush
yourself a little bit so when you walk out, you would look a little bit, you know, clean up your shoes
and all that. And, and she was very, very kind, but she said even if you go to see my husband, he is
not that rich and not that with money, oh she gave me some money too, Polish money. Twenty or fifty
Zloty, I can't remember how much and she said, that's what I like to help you, but my husband won't
be able to help you much, because he couldn't help Zelda, so maybe our, that was her father-in-law,
but her husband's father will be able to help you. So I went in and find Simon, so he had the sandwich
and we start walking and walking and we couldn't find a way out. And you know what Simon said? Have
you got a belt? I said I haven't got, I've got one, but it's holding my skirt, why did you need
a belt for? Oh I'm going to hang myself, I can't see a way out. I said if you would put my belt
on my neck it's allright, but I can't do it myself. So he abandoned that, that  and we walked and
walked and then of a sudden I said we can't do that anymore at nighttime. Let's walk at day, daytime
and ask people. If we are found out who knows. Anyhow, we walked and walked and walked and I find myself
out to a little village not far where  we were living in Siedliczcze, I walked into that farmer and
I, she recognised me straight away and I knew her very well. And she told me [swallows], I saw certain
things from my grandmother there, when we were taking away from the ghetto to Staw, all the people,
she, she ca, mein grandmother went over there and tell us something is going to happen to us too, we
can't stay there anymore, but if you need something come and get it. And a day after we were taking
to, to, to Staw, the Germans came and took all the, all, all the sick and all the children out from
Siedliczcze ghetto. And they execute them on the  in Hebrew it's , in English is the cemetary, the
Jewish cemetary.
Yes.
And that's where mein  where the farmer gave me something and she said that I'm sure it was your
mother's. And she gave me my mother's nighty. And that nighty I made when I was in the sixth grade
at school, we learned sowing. And I had that nighty with me till I came to, to Australia and it's
in the museum now.  The Sydney Jewish museum.  It's not as, as eh it was, but it's still in one
piece. It was a cotton nighty with lace here and lace about there and lace on the bottom and with ties
and that's what the farmer gave me. And when I came back [swallows] from the  Golebiowski  Simon,
I went home to the Golebiowski's home and I left him at the farm and when I came back Simon left me
a note and he says I will only an eh a mill s, millstone on your neck, you won't survive with me,
you go your own way and I'll go my own way. And when I got to the Golebiowski's father and he said
Zelda was here but she left. And he put me up in the, the somewhere where there was a very big, you
know, he gave me even something to eat and to drink and he gave me an eh, eh light so it would be safe
on, on straw or hay I was laying and he gave me a book to read. I knew that book because that was made
out a film in Poland and that Raymond he got the Nobel price for that book. [swallows] And from there
on I made my way somewhere else, I went to Chelm. And on Chelm I was looking for Ireen, the one, the
secretary of the Waterboard in  Siedliczcze. She saw me, she said don't go any further, she was with
another friend and that other friend was dressed up like a nurse from a hospital. And she said where
are you going? And she talked in Polish, oh she said that's a good friend, that's a friend of my
mother's friend, something like that, she found something, I said I want to go to Kanie, in the railway
station I haven't got a ticket, could it, oh she'll buy me a ticket, she even waited when I got
in the train and she waived to me and she even said don't forget to write. So everything was so camouflaged
you know, I'm a good, good friend of hers and eh  anyhow, I went to Kanie and there was, and a gentlemen,
it was almost the, getting dark and eh and  a gentleman was sitting on the seat and I said I know the
people, but I've never been there, would you know where Alexander eh  Jageluk lives? Oh yes, I'll,
I go that way, if you walk with me I'll show you his house.  And that was another angel.  He showed
me where Jageluk lived and I walked in there, mrs Helena she almost clapped when she saw me, she said
we'll hide you here. You don't have to go anywhere. I said no, Alexander, no Helena you've got
two daughters and you never know who you enemy is. If they will find me here, you'll all will be executed.
If only you could get me a ticket to Lublin and I'll go there to the Arbeitsambt and I'll make my
way out somewhere there. I said I've got a birth, a birth certificate-
But how had you gotten that? How did you get that birth certificate? You haven't told yet.
Oh I forgot to tell you. But I, when I was  oh gosh, you see, when I went home  because somebody
was living in our place, she was eh the, the  mother of, of a policeman with the children and another
lady came in and I didn't want to stay inside the house, but another lady came in, he, she recognised
me and we talked a lot. And I was going to sleep at home, but not in the house, but somewhere else.
There was a lot of buildings there in the back with a lot of stuff in there and eh she said you wait
here and I'll go and bring you something, but don't leave. She came back with her daughter's
birth certificate and she put it on the table and she said now read it, you know I don't have to
tell you who she is, but from now on forget who you were, you are a Polish Catholic girl and you
were born there and there on that and that street. She was
Where w, which place were you born?
Lodz
Okay.
Eastern Poland, that's where all, all the Poles were escaping from the Ukraine. And I was one
of them. Anyhow, I took the, the birth certificate and when I got to, to the   I was already
having something and I told him could, could Alexander get me  a train ticket. Because you couldn't
travel in Poland then without a pass more than thirty kilometres, but from Kanie to Lublin was
fiftytwo so I couldn't even buy a ticket. So Alexander went to the station, he bought me a
ticket to Lublin  and he said: one thing, don't go into Lublin, s, step out one station before.
And that particular day the train didn't s,  it went in right the main station to Lublin. What
am I going to do now? There was a lady on the pla, on the train with two little girls and a lot
of packages. And I didn't look like I'm a escapee anymore because I tidied myself up, you
know, they gave me things with me and all that and I
And you had eaten some ways
you know, it even, Hel, Helena gave me underware and I had something else and something
else and, and I looked a little bit better, you know, and then eh  I said to that
woman you've got two children and that many packages, can I help you?
She said when we go down, you just stay with mein daughters and I will go to the main gate with my
papers, she's from Chelm and she's moving to Lublin. And that will be a great help for me. But
where I was standing with the two girls  I didn't note it straight away, there was a little gate
and the gate wasn't locked. While she had all her papers with the  the staff near the main gate,
she nod to me like that, it means everything is allright and then I noticed the gate wasn't locked,
so I kicked the gate open and walked through with the two girls.  It was another miracle.  I would
never got through the main gate without a pass, whe, where I was coming from.  So, and I waited when
she came across and I told her that I'm going to Lublin to  I told her the street, that was the
main street in Lublin, allee like in Warsaw, near a res,  . And I ask where is the Arbeitsambt here?
And they showed me a very beautiful building. Lublin wasn't bombed. And I walked up there and I
was looking for the Arbeitsambt. I couldn't see, but the door was open. And I looked in and there
was a elderly gentleman in front of a very big desk. And he called me in. And I didn't see the sign
on the door what it says there. And he asked me what I want. I told him in Polish, he couldn't understand
me. And then the secretary came in and she was so angry with me, didn't I see the sign? I said no,
the door was open. And he wanted to know what I want. I said I just want to be a volunteer worker
to Germany. I came from Eastern Poland and I can't stay there any longer. I'm Polish and I rather
go to Germany as a volunteer worker. And they knew what was happening in Eastern Poland, what the
Ukrains were doing. Anyhow, he took a p, eh sheet of paper and he wrote something on it, put a stamp
there and, and signed the stamp. And the girl, and the eh the Polish girl told me go with that paper
to Krochmalnerstreet and they will fix up everything for your travel to Germany. So I went there with
that paper and there were two young men sitting there and where, they did read it, where did you get
that paper, how did you manage? I said hold your horses, it was just in Arbeitsambt. Who is that gentleman
who signed it? That was the Gau leiter and the  Gauleiter, you know what the Gau leiter is?-
Yes, sure!
leiter from, from whole  that  whole not just city, but the whole
The whole district.
the whole district of Lublin. Anyhow, do I like to have a cup of tea, do
I like that, I said no, I just like to sign myself in for a couple of days
and they will fix up the papers, because I'm going to Germany.
Did you know anybody in Germany?
Oh yes, yes I knew, you see, I forgot. When I was at Alexander's place [swallows] Helena
guide me, she said my niece is already in Frankfurt in Germany, she gave me the address.
And when I was at the, Lublin at the Arbeitsambt, I showed them the address and that's
why he wrote out the paper for, for Frankfurt. Allright, I waited eh two days, they brought
over with a very big ticket and gave me something on the way to eat and that particular eight
o'clock at night, that was the second of November, I'll board the train to Germany. So
I had to get first to Warsaw, had to stay I don't know how many hours in the Warsaw, the
station was so beautiful before the war, but it was all, you know
broke, bomb, broken up, but the train was still running. From Warsaw I had to catch
a train to Poznan and from Poznan that was eh  eh  what is the place there where
the border was, in a minute it will come to me, and at the border they will tell
you what train to catch to German, to Germany. Berlin  in German a
So I got from Poznan /Polsenheim to Berlin and at Berlin I was getting the train to Germany. And
when I was already on the train they told me where to sit and eh I had the ticket and I had some,
whatever they gave me, a bread and jam or something on the way to eat and eh  we got to Berlin. And
there was a terrible air raid. We had to get out the train to go to a bunker.  And when I got out
from the bunker instead to go to the train, to go to  I went to a train who was going and I forgot
this name of the other station, instead to go across to Frankfurt I went like that.
Hmhm.
So when I went to that station it stopped, because it was bombed, it was still burning. And how do I
get to Frankfurt? I couldn't see anybody where I could ask. But there was a young man with a P on his
arm, he sto, he was standing and talking to a uniformed man and I went over to him to speak in Polish,
all I have to go to Frankfurt, how, when can I catch a train here? I know I am on the wrong station and
all that, told him what happened and that uniformed man told him I could understand him, but I didn't
want to let on and he told him two o'clock at, in the morning a train is, a fast train is going to
Frankfurt. But when I get into that train not to talk to anybody because that train is nur für Deutsche.
They couldn't find out that I'm a Ausländer. So but he told me if you sit near a window and all
the windows are camouflaged and pretend that you are tired and asleep and don't talk to anybody. I
did that. And a lady opposite me, an elderly lady asked me would I like to have coffee she had in a thermos.
I could say Dankeschön and I pretend I'm sleeping. And there were eh, they told me there were four
stations to, to  Frankfurt and if they discover who I am, they will only take you off and put you on
another train. Not to worry. But I managed to get throught right to Frankfurt. I arrived in Frankfurt
eleven o'clock, mid day and all the offices are open till twelve. I managed to say in German how can
I get to the employment office. And they told me on a station, it was a tram station, that number one
tram will take me to the employment office. I got to the employment officem was about ten minutes to
twelve, they were closing.  Who speaks Polish and, and, and a German, and a German tra, tram station!
Oh yes, there was a veteran from the First Worldwar who was from Poland. A German who was from Poland.
And he said he's going to take me home and his wife will be very happy to see a young person in the
house because his two sons are at the Eastern front and tomorrow morning he will take me where I have
the address to that and that place in Frankfurt. But in the meantime he found out that that place was
bombed and all the workers there was transferred to castle. So he's taking me home, but while I was
waiting with him, whatever he went to see a friend, he came back with that friend and that friend was
asking me in, in Polish to me, that other one, could I stay there till Monday? I said I can't speak
German. Why. There's a four years old boy and there's nobody, they had somebody from the army and
she has to go back today and they haven't got anybody who will look after the boy. And that people
had a very big transport business.
And the wife was the, the, the, the keeper of the office. Nobody had got time to look after that
little boy. And that little boy come running down the, the steps and grabbed me by the hand, he didn't
wait for anything, he pulled me up.  And they told me his name is Hans Peter, but he said call me
Peter. I can't speak German. There was a lot of Polish workers downstairs because he had a transport
business and they will help me out. And that little boy, because I couldn't speak much and I couldn't
understand him much, but he was going to teach me German. So he came down to the kitchen and put
all the utensils he can reach and he told me that's a cup and that's a, that and that is an
a ma, eh Messer, that is a knife and that's that and that, all the table had the things from the
kitchen. And then he took me back and I have to remember every one. And if I forget something I had
to start from the beginning. And you will be surprised, in six weeks I could read, read him his German
books, children's books.  And he taught me German, he was always with me. Hans Peter was all the,
mother couldn't even give him a bath and I had to kneel down and teach him in Polish Our Father,
because I d, I didn't know the German 'Our Father'  I didn't know it then, so he learned
so quickly the Polish prayers. I had a Polish prayer book, so we used to pray together in Polish.
He learned [laughs] in Polish a lot of things quicker than I learned it in German. And then we were
friends forever.  That little boy was something, I think every mother would have wished to have a
son like that. He was jewel. He was so clever with everything. He only, even when his mother was
going somewhere and she didn't remember the address, and Peter was with us the first time he remembered
where to go.
You loved him?
I loved him. Very much.
Is he still alive?  [louder] Is he still alive?
Oh, I don't know now, but three years ago he stopped writing. I used to write to him. I even went
to visit, to visit him after the war, because there was another incident with eh  the people I was
working for. And that man, he was a very, very good eh, eh German, he belonged to the Nazi, but he
wasn't a Nazi.  And  when the air raids were over, he builded a, a bunker under the house, a cellar,
but it was so secure. One day I was running to another, to the Ostbahnhoff bunker and I fell, they
gave me a bicycle and I was going with that bicycle to the bunker and I went into the rail eh, what
is it called  from the  the r, r, from the  on the, on the road, the railing for the
Yes.
you know, and I fell and people were running over me and I said I'm not going to do that
anymore, I'm going back home and if that bunker is not strong enough it doesn't matter.
But I could, take down the radio and I put it on the short waves and we had there Ukrains
and two Russians and the Frenchmen and two Polish workers, we had plenty and we all could
listen to different languages, even the German language from the BBC.
Yes.
B, but when that was over we had to turn it back to the normal radio and the normal radio
was always ticking like a clock, that means that the air was free, no air raids and, but
when air raids were coming they, they were telling where it was coming from. The English
were bombing at night time and the American at day time.  And I was so glad that the people
couldn't come down to the cellar, you know, because they wouldn't like that, that
we put the radio on to listen what was going on in the world.
But one S, Sunday, the air raid was so quick that we didn't manage to escape, they didn't manage
to go anywhere and then not far away was a very big brewery on the, there was under a, a little hill,
a mountain. On top of that mountain was a castle  but there were two Frenchmen who were allowed to stay
there in that bunker and eh elderly people had eh, eh little eh rooms there, the one who couldn't run
to a bunker, they were almost living there, because the air raids were day and night.
And, and that was lunch time, and, and, and you know, they were going to, on the bicycles to that bunker
and because I wasn't going, Hans Peter didn't want to go. He hung onto my leg if I'm not going
he's staying at home. Allright, and then it wasn't anymore time to go anywhere. They had to come
down with all the workers to the, to the home bunker. And that particular Sunday, there was a full
proof bomb over that brewery.  Twohundred were killed and the two Frenchmen too. If that boy didn't
hang on to my leg, they would have been killed too.  What did, what, what do you say?  Peshehed yes.
Anyhow, and from then on they didn't go anywhere. I was only sorry that we couldn't listen to the
radio. And I was always six o'clock in the morning, I was always going downstairs to clean the office.
But the first thing was always to switch on the radio. When I was down there six o'clock, I switched
the radio on and God forbid, it was on the short wave BBC London.  I switched off very quickly and
then when mister Hillmann, when he came down I closed the door and talked to him  that is only between
us, I know what you were listening to, but please don't forget to switch it over. Because nobody
will believe me and I'll get a bullet in my head for that.  And that was between us. Nobody else
knew about it. And he never forget to switch it over because he was always the last at night time to
come out from the office. Shall we stop?
Eh, no I wanted
No, shall I finish?
I wanted to ask you one more question.
Yes?
But you, you didn't trust him that much that you told him who you were?
I did who? Eh, in Germany?
Yes.
Even the, the, the man who were working there didn't
know that I'm not Polish, a Polish Catholic girl.
You had this secret about the BBC
Oh no, no, nobody did, the bo, nobody knew, but later on  after
the war I'll tell you, if you want to hear it now?
No, I just
Have you got time?
we have time, if you have time it's okay.
Yes. I've got time. And then [swallows] eh one day we were all there in the bunker and eh
Frankfurt was bombed.  And that place was eh burned down. And they were told they threw down
leaflets. And they were telling the Frankfurt population to get out from the city.
Hmhm.
And nobody was listening.  And they, they, you know, ignored it. And there was, I think the
19th of March and the 20th of March and the 21st of March they were bombing Frankfurt. And
It's okay.
and, and that place, it wasn't bombed, but a phosphor bomb was thrown, was thrown on the house and
the house burned down while we were downstairs in that bunker. And when we were opening the door,
the flames were coming down. We couldn't get out for a little while.  And all the, the, the, the,
the trucks who were in the garages with a lot, it was a weekend, there were a lot with somebody wanted
to get out from the city, somebody's furniture or somebody other goods and they always organised
that the, that the, the, the Polish or the Russian or the, or the, the Dutch driver will drive those
things out to the country because they used to, to, to give them, move because everything was rationed
so the, the workers used to get a little bit more food, because there was always arranged if it wasn't
a baker, it was maybe, you know a  eh  butcher or something like that and then get a lot more food
from them instead of money. And eh  everything was burned up.
And the, he, he had horses but the horses managed to get out from the barns. And later on they built
the house back up again and eh, eh was still staying downstairs. But while they were building the house,
I got and with the boy away to the country because he'll, when he had a sister with a very big farm
and I was looking for the boy in the, in the country, from time to time they used to bring me over
to Frankfurt to clean something up and all that, but most of the time I stayed when all that was  you
know, eh wasn't so bad to be in the country. And then we could hear that the front is coming closer
and closer. The rumbling  was almost like, like v, aeroplanes over us, but that was artillery from
far, far away. And everybody was hiding in the cellars because we never knew where it was coming from.
And one morning everything was so still.  We didn't hear any rumbling anymore. And we got out from
the cellars  and we couldn't see anything, you couldn't hear any, and everybody was standing in
the fences of the, the places. And of a sudden we saw a jeep coming and three soldiers on a jeep  the
one with a machinegun and that was the American army.  That was the 27th of April 1945.  I first saw
the Americans coming in. The  was signed the 8th
I know.
but I saw them first.
What did you feel?
I felt I don't know there's something else and the American, the soldiers were
coming out from the jeeps and from other vehicles and giving, there was a lot of
children and they were giving them chocolates, they were giving them biscuits and
the children was told never to re, receive anything from the eh
From Americans.
from, not Americans, from the other side, it's got a name, but now I can't think of it.
Enemy.
Enemy, yes, thank you. And I had to taste the chocolates and give it to the children and taste. And
I found somebody from the American soldiers could speak German or Polish, so we could understand
each other what it was and then, you know, when that happened two or three days later, he came over,
the father came, mister Hildmann came over to the country and took me and took eh Hans Peter with
him. And then the Americans were gathering all the displaced persons into a camp.
But then you told the father that you were who you were?
Then, when that
How did you tell? What happened?
He, I told him who I am and how I am, but, and all that. He said he knew what
was happening in concentration camps, but he actually was a paying Nazi. He
knew it was wrong, but what could he, but what could he have done?
Hmhm.
Tell me. But he was so good for the workers. I don't think s, you could find, but then after
the war, when I was already living in the, in displaced persons camp, I got a call from American
to come to Frankfurt. So I hopped on the train and got to Frankfurt. Frankfurt had eh one eh
suburb. It was called the  Anlage. Three tall buildings only, but they were, the walls were
camouflaged, painted trees, the Americans didn't bomb, bomb that, because it was a little
forest. But that was the American headquarters in Frankfurt. And mister Hildmannwas called
to the Americans and all the other workers was called over to tell how mister Hillmann behaved
during the war. And I only could tell everything good and I told them the way he was listening
to the ABC and only two of us knew about it. [laughs]
Listen, I think we have to stop
Yes.
because you are, your story is deteriorating, so I think
And then I was taken back to Frankfurt.
We ended with you
But I skipped something.
What did you skip?
Before that.
Yes?
When I met my husband
Yes.
during the war.
Yes?
Can I go back for  then?
Yes. Please.
That was in, in summer '44.
Yes?
Or was it, yes I think it was still summer then. And eh I was working upstairs in, in the rooms
and of a sudden when I looked out the window there were two Polish soldiers. On, on, downstairs,
talking with a German soldier and talking to Mr. Hildmann and they were from the prisoners of
war outside Frankfurt, they were a lot, there's an  that was an officers prisoners of war from
Poland. And I run down because I've never seen a Polish soldier in Germany and I start talking
to them in Polish and they were just, you know, my husband could, spoke very well German, it wasn't
my husband then, but that soldier could speak very well German and they intro, they introduced
themselves to me. And, and eh I was so amazed, you know, I was so happy when I saw them and then
they was taking from there for the camp, eh cole and potatoes.
Yes?
And the German soldier took them back outside where that all was and I didn't see
them anymore. And then when the, after the war, when the Americans were collecting
all the displaced person in Frankfurt and we were put in, there was a  a street, there
were nothing but little, not cottages but it was connected a lot of little eh  house,
hou, not houses, but like we have here, what is it called, eh
Bungalows?
yes, and, and  and we were up to, the women, single women and the women with children were on those places
upstairs and I was upstairs with them and the others were somewhere downstairs and when I looked down
on, and  downstairs at the, the yard down there, there were the two Polish soldiers there.
Again?
Again. And there were more Polish soldiers there because they took all the displaced
persons, even if they were displaced, or displaced persons, you know, eh, as, as militaire
there, there were all taking away and they were put in those places where we were and
we didn't stay very long in there, and they took us away to a very, very big  a German
eh Luftwaffekazerne, that would be in English eh, eh Luf
Air, airforce kazerne.
air, airforce, they were very, very big places, three, three story high places and that was in Wetzlar,
it wasn't in Frankfurt, it was a little bit away from, and that's where we were allocated in
there. And then there were the  the s, the, the  displaced persons, per, person and even the prisoners
of war were there too. There, I don't know how many thousand of people they situated there, it
was not only from Polish people or whatever, were all in that camp in Wetzlar.
How were conditions there?
The conditions was allright, because the American was feeding us, where the food was coming
from, they were clothing us, there were very big ships were coming from everywhere and there
was eh so organised that, that they took from the camp people who wanted to work.  And eh, you
know, then I went, wanted to work there, so they put me in the clothing eh magazine and I was
helping out people with, with whatever they needed clothes. And one day eh somebody in an uniform,
a Polish uniform, come in, came in and he was looking for socks and a football.  And we looked
at him, there were other people, but we had our people who was organising that was from Holland,
that was Mary van Wessum, she was a militair eh, eh  I don't remember the ranks, but they
were all, all from the mil, militair. And we had the, the  the, mein person who was loo, looking
after that big, big camp, was an English general.
And his name was Watkins. But he had other militair under him, not English for, but Dutch people. A
lot of Dut, and, but all in uniforms. And they were looking for the people in camps, they were organising
straight away with different countries, for different, you know that, they, they were not lost, we
had all the Polish, Polish and, and a lot of them, you know, with the Polish people they could speak
English to them and they were organising us, I remember the one who was looking after the food for
us was from Danzigand as soon I was a, a Gdansk, or Danzig, Danzig was the  name and, and a lot, a
lot of people, you know, and I just, like I said, I volunteer for work and I was taking to that magazine
where the clothing were and I have even got in then the book, there is a, a picture, where I was, you
know, working. And that particular person, we've tried to find for him socks and a ball and then
he found some shirts and he [swallows] had a Polish polonja, he put a Polish, eh  soccer team together.
And then  the soc, the Polish people were taking away to another camp  and we, there were people coming
from Russia and from allover other places and they were Jewish people. And I was amongst them.  But
now I have to go back, if you would be so kind to switch it off for a little, I have to organise myself
how to start talking about it. Because in the, just now I've got a little bit a mixture in my head.
I don't know what comes first. Can I
Okay, but
can I, can I
you can, you can just start and I'll try to help you.
Yes. I, I eh met that eh man again who organised the polonja first and he was starting, you
know, want to know where I'm from, because I helped him out a lot from that clothing magazine
for, for the, the, the football, eh, you know and my husband, he was the coach. And
And it was the same man as you had seen before?
yes, with that, what I met in, in Frankfurt during the war.
Yes.
And I met him later on and he came in to get the football stuff that was always the same man. Even one
day I thought that he was stealing something, he found eh, eh ball or a football and he put it un, under
his jacket and I asked what have you got something here, what are you taking? And he said I'm not taking,
I was just keeping so it wouldn't get lost, something like that. And it was so lovely, we spoke in
Polish and I asked where he was from and he wanted to know where I was from and on the beginning I was
a Polish Catholic girl and he was a Catholic man who was born in, in south, in eh Ost Pruisen, that was
not far from Danzig and he was working in Gdansk, in Danzig, and all that. And I found out that he was
a eh journalist. You know, and all that. And then that went on a little bit further and further, he never
left me alone and I don't left him alone. And of a sudden he proposed would I like to marry him. And
it was a little bit, you know, I was only twenty then, I though I am a little bit too young and, you
know, but he was a lot older than I was. And I, I thought myself, I saw him more as a father person than
a husband. Not that old, but he, for his age he looked
Much older.
ve, very yo, young and mature and all that and maybe that uniform attracted me that much, but in
the meantime, when all that was happening the Polish people were take, there was something else
in that Wetzlar camp, there was a lot of Russian peo, people who didn't want to go back to Russia.
But the Russians were then, you know, with the American and  they were allies and they could do
whatever they want, so they collect all the people who were from Russia, but the woman tried to
escape, you wouldn't believe what they did to their own women. They shaved their heads.  So they
couldn't escape from that part of Wetzlar  camp, where the Russians
You  to the women?
Yes, the Russian, the communist, the regime, the communist regime did that
to them, because they didn't want to go back to Russia. They wanted to stay
in German or go somewhere else or meet other people. And eh later on
Were those Jewish women?
Not yet, not yet, maybe they were but we didn't hear about it.
Yes.
But then there was a lot of that was transferred somewhere else and a lot of Jewish people were
starting to come from all over.  Mostly from Russia. I didn't know if they were all Jewish,
but a lot, a lot of people, you know we had eh, eh  I don't know how to, to explain. From all
nominations, but it was so hard for me to accept the Russian Jews. Because we never, I don't
know, because they were so hungry of things, they w, once there even said, maybe I shouldn't
say that, they would have stepped over corpses to get what they wanted.
They had suffered so much.
Pardon?
They had suffered so much?
The, the camp had everything but it was never enough. And they were, they let them in because they
promised they will go to Palestine. And they never did. They were going, running away whatever
they could, but they tried to get everything they could, even sometimes the Germans was complaining
that they had got somebody was stealing the, the, the, eh  chicken or stealing eh  whatever, you
know and the Americans had enough for us to feed us and give  us, they didn't have to do it.
But for the Russian migrants it was never enough. And that's what I, even, I shouldn't say,
because we are all migrants there, but eh I didn't like them, what, whatever they were doing,
you know. But for me it was something like  a family came back from Russia. And I recognised them.
And they were eh, they had the oil, oil factory in Siedliczcze
Hmhm.
and one of the daughters was in the same class as my sister
and we started to talk and she even brought out a album, even from the school and
from a school photo where my sister was only seven then, just started school, she
cut out [scrapes throat], pardon me, [scrapes throat] my sister's photo and that
was the only photo I've got from home when my sister was seven years old.
It's in the book, yes.
It's in the book. And I was really, really happy about it. I, I enlarged it, you know, later on, I
got somebody who did it for me and it's a normal picture. And there was a lot, a lot of Jewish people
in that camp then and there was trying a lot, a lot, was registered to go to Palestine, a lot to the
United States and to you name it. And  I didn't know where I belong to, I was almost ready, but before,
because I was working I was allowed to live outside the camp. So I was living privately. And everyday
I was going into the camp for work and while I was getting ready to go to Poland, because there were
a lot of people were registered to go back to their own countries, like to, to, to, to, you name it,
even a lot to Poland and I wanted to go back to Poland. And that was a Saturday and somebody knocked
at mein door and Henrich Kupper, Kuperscki came along, but that was Zelda's cousin, he was a little
bit connected, but far away, I couldn't call him that he was my cousin, but I recognised him, even
he was only about fifteen when I saw him and of a sudden he was nineteen, but he had a string of grey
hair on his head and I said what happened to, you know, he started to explain where he was working and
he, he survived and all that. And he said that he  had got greetings from Zelda. Zelda eh is in eh Stuttgart.
And she eh found her, her uncles in America and she was going to the United States.  And then she was
outside and then slowly he told me that I brought back Zelda with me so she came in. Because he didn't
want to shock me that she's alive. And from there on she wanted me to go back with her to, to Stuttgart,
eh but my husband was a little bit, not to agree, but he said once I leave I'll never come back. But
I couldn't go to the United States because I had to wait for somebody who will sponsor us  and she
had somebody, she, she had uncles then in the United State, and one of the uncles adopted her. Because
the same Metz.
Hmhm.
And the same surname. Anyhow, she left. And v, eh  I think it was
May or, or June '46, she left to the United States.  And, and
Were you already  married?
I was ma, oh yes, I was married, oh
When did you marry?
I forgot to tell. I
Yes, that's, I promised you to help you.
married the 24th of December 1945, Christmas
So you said
eve.
you had said yes when he proposed.
When he proposed, yes.
Because you liked him?
I liked him, yes, very much, yes. I loved him very much, he loved me. Oh he was, not, not just loved
me, that, but he was jalous of ev, every [laughs] person who came along and one day even there was
a ball and then a Polish officer, he was twice as tall as I am, he came along to ask me for a dance
and I remember that my nose was just on his eh buckle of his, of his belt [laughs] from the uniform
and all that. [laughs] Anyhow, we had to wait, we were registered to go to the United States, because
other friends went along to the United States and they promised they will help us to get out from
Germany. But it took a little bit too long to find an America sponsor to get a couple out and in
the meantime  Andrew was born, the, the, the 4th of February '47  and not long after, a year after,
you know, I was so very sick. The operation started too
Wait, wait, you're going too fast now.
I'm going too fast again. Anyhow, we, we couldn't, we stayed there privately where we were living
and eh my husband was with the Jewish community in the camp, he was with the Andra, the united restitution
organisation, you know, and he was eh with other people, in the meantime my husband found his brother
and his brother was in the English zone, because the, that was where the English was fighting the
German and he was with the Polish army there. So he came over and he had, had already married a Russian
woman, but she had pe, papers made out that she's Polish, she spoke very well Polish and she was
a midwife. She had documents as a doctor from Russia and eh  the brother came over and he settled
a little while with us, but he wanted very badly to go back to Poland. So in about a year's time
they already had a lit, a girl and we helped him a lot out, you know, from the Russian zone, not
Rus, the American zone, we had everything to help them while we were working and all that, and then
my husband found his eh, a general was looking for the Polish prisoners of war who was in there in
that [and he found mein husband and he belonged to that eh, that he could ask for restitution, so
we got quite a lot of  dollars, we got dollars paid out. I can't remember how much, six hundred
or a thousand dollars and that was like money from heaven. But on top of that Zelda was sending parcels
to Germany throught Charitas and that was something, you know, it was hard to, to, to, to explain,
and those parcels had everything. When I was short of money there was coffee and even there was,
and I could sell the coffee
Sure!
you know, and all that to Ge, the Germans were so for coffee, they would have given you anything
for it and [swallows] anyhow, I wasn't so, not that I wasn't well, but eh  I had to go
to Ho, eh bef, and in 1948  I was diagnosed, the kidney wasn't working.
But let's, let's go back.
Go back.
How did Zelda find you?
Oh
I'll help you [laughs]
Oh, you are a marvel [laughs], Zelda was hiding in Lvov in Lemberg in Poland. And after the war
she came home, I don't know when, but when she came home and when she was in Siedliczcze, she
passed our, I still call our house, that was on, on the street, you know, it was still standing,
it didn't burn down, and there was a beautiful acacia tree, was already blooming and there was
a lady standing and watching those and she was so very badly treated,  Zelda told me, to get some
flowers of the tree and she asked that woman what are you, why are you standing there and, and
watching the tree? She said I knew that family, I get goosebump when I talk about it, I knew that
family and one of the daughters [scrapes throat] has survived and one of the daughters are in
Germany. And she told her who I am  and she said that Zelda nearly fainted, she had to hold on
to her. She gave Zelda the address of Frankfurt, because in the meantime the American were taking
out all the displaced person from Frankfurt to Wetzlar  and Zelda managed to get away from the
communist Poland. How she got out from Poland she was
You really don't know?
telling, yes, she was acting as a, not as a Polish person, as a, eh  Turkish or, or Greek,
a Greek girl, she couldn't speak Polish and she had a rugsack, how do you call it eh
A rugsack, yes.
yes, yes, and she had a little
Backpack.
bit of, backpack, clothing and the, the train was so packed that the poor thing didn't know that,
that somebody cut her ru, her backpack and took all her clothes out. And when she got to Frankfurt,
there was nothing in her, in her backpack. Anyhow, she had the address, so she had find the Hildmann's]
and she went to look for me. But I wasn't there anymore, I was in Wetzlar  and the Hildmann's
told her where I was, so she came to, to Wetzlar to the camp, the displaced persons camp. And that
was on a Saturday. And she came to the headoffice. And the headoffice didn't know where to look
for, but I was registrered in that office, with the Americans, because just exactly the same as
mein eh Arbeitsbuch for the Germans, the, the other name
The other name, yes.
other name, but my mother's name they wanted, the Germans wanted to know, but they told me in
the camp when we were being registered, don't say that your mother's maiden name is Richter,
because the, the chef in the, in the  casino, his name was Richter, can't you find another name.
So I gave mein grandmother's name for my mother. I put it down as Ordinatsky.
Aha.
Yes. And Zelda found, because she remembers Ordynacki  name, because that was a grandfa, great grandfather
and that's how she found me in, in Wetzlar  in the camp. The Americans looked up, you know, the,
the Woitchiczyn because of the Ordynacki she said that's, that's her. And they gave her, her private
address in Wetzlar. And then, you know, that's how she found me. And I was ready for Monday to go
back to Poland. She said go, don't back, you won't find anybody alive.
She told you?
Yes, from your family or for my family, there's nobody alive, don't go back to Poland,
stay where you are. And she stayed with me a little while. I was already married.
Was it a shock to you, to hear there was nobody there?
Yes. I thought I would find somebody. You see, my youngest brother, if he would have stayed with
the people that my mother want to leave him, he was a very blond boy and he was only eleven, I remember
when he was going to school, the boys were last eh, laughed about him because he was so blond and
they used to call him a [says something in Polish?] that means the pigs head. And one day he was
going home from school and he went to his father's eh barber, who used to shave him and all that,
he said my father told me to cut my hair off, completely shave his head. And he came home, that
was just a school holidays in Ju, June, it was very hot and my mother nearly fainted. He didn't
have his hair. Why did you do it, because they called me pigs head and, and everybody said if you
shave the head off, the other hair will be a little bit darker.
[laughs] Poor boy.
And that little, that boy, my mother, somebody want to keep him. My brother's very
bit, b, best friend from school, a family who was called Sadowsky, he said leave him
with us, he, I can tell that we've got, you know, a grandson from western Poland,
from Posnan or from there, nobody will question him. But he didn't want to stay there,
as soon mum left the Sadowsky family, he come running after her.
He wanted his mother.
Want his mother.
But did you know that?
Oh yes, I was there when
Yes.
that, that happened, yes, of course I know that.
But you still expected to find him?
spI
I, I asked you in the beginning
Yes, yes, I, but I expect to find somebody. Maybe, you know, a, a relative from another place, not,
not from Siedliczcze, maybe somebody who came back even from Russia or something, I'll find somebody
there in Siedliczcze, I wanted to go back. And even later on from the United States I got, not from
the United States, we had friends in Barbados and I was looking through the, the Red Cross, after
the war, and the English helped a lot with the Red Cross and I, I wrote to Barbados, I didn't
have the Katz family, but my mother's best friend lived in Barbados. And they helped me to write
there, because I knew her maiden name and one of the brothers, David Katz, was with her and they
found him and I got, I've got that letter from Barbados in 1947. I still have got it. And they
found somebody in the United States, the Red Cross, with the name of Jozef Feldman, and she thought
that that could be my father. But it wasn't. Because it was somebody else from Siedliczcze, there
were three families with the same name, with Feldman, so it wasn't my father. And that, you know,
I was trying so very hard to find somebody.
That's why you wanted to go back and
To go back to Poland, yes.
and then Zelda said
Zelda said don't, because you'll never get out, there was nobody there left from our family.
Did it make you depressed?
I was more than de, depressed, you know, I said  how is it possible to
survive alone in the world?  To be young.  And, and, and, anyhow.
Because what you forgot to tell yesterday, is that after liberation
you had this psychological collapse or nervous breakdown.
I had, yes, I had the, the, where I was working
Yes.
I had that, that night, when tomorrow, I was, had to get ready to go with the Americans to the
displaced person and I started to cry and I told mister Hildmann who I am, that I  and he told
me that he knew what was happening to the Jews and I said that I haven't got anybody in the
world, where shall I turn, I haven't got a name, I haven't got anybody. And I didn't want
and I, I, I got hys, hys, I don't know, hysterical, but while I was lying in bed and crying,
that beautiful dog of mine, Lümpy, came along and he was crying with me
Really?
and, and the workers at eh, downstairs thought that somebody did, did harm me and the Hillmann
called a doctor and the doctor gave me a pill, something to calm me down, because I was afraid
to go out in the free world, not to have anybody to look for. You know?  And
Did you calm down
Yes.
that, that
The, the pill
anxiety?
yes, and next day, you know, the Americans, they came in, collect everybody, you know, to a camp.
But, but I'm talking about you, did you calm down or were you still anxious when
You know, I calmed down because I stopped  crying and, and hysterical, hysterical cry, you know,
I couldn't, Hillmann couldn't calm me down, but the doctor did. And next day I was ready,
ready to leave. And even they gave me, he was very good, she didn't want to give me a blanket
and a pillow and my clothes and he even gave me some money. He was the best German person under
the sun, not just for me, for all his, this, workers, they were Dutchmen
Frenchmen, Polish, Ukrain, all of them, he looked all a, after them, you know, as much as he could.
But what I'm trying to discuss with you, or to
Yes?
ask you about
Yes, please.
is, is how yóu were eh, because you had this very serious breakdown
Yes.
you married?
I wasn't married then.
No, but later you married.
Later I married, you know. And he helped me a lot. I was
Can you talk a little bit about
I was
how you felt in those
I, I wasn't alone
first mo
because my husband had that many other friends. And you know, I got to know them,
they got to know me and, you know, really  not just, you know, high ranking friends,
they were all, if it wasn't an engineer, it was something li, like not eh, even
doctor, doctor Brondi, he was a doctor from, from Poland and he had another do, doctor,
doctorate in Germany and I had a growth here on, on mein eh, it eh
Chin?
chin, you know and, and even when I was in Germany, little Hans-Peter, when I used to  my face,
it used to swell up and he used a little, the boy used to come along and said when I grew up I'll
going to be a doctor and I'll help you. And then after the war, doctor Brondi, he said I'll
help you with that growth. I was something inside, like a wart, but inside and he cut it out. Later
on I found out that it was the first thing he did [laughs], practed, was on me.  So they had a daughter
who was born the same week as Andrew was born and they went away to the United Stated and he, it
wasn't easy, easy in the United State to be a doctor, because he was only in a hospital as a,
as a, a nurse, in a, you know, and she had to live somewhere else, not in hospital. But we kept
all the time, you know, and they wanted so very badly for us to go over to the United States too.
They tried and then was another eh family, Janosz, Janosz and Maria, not Szikorsky, eh, a little
bit, another name, and he was an engineer, he got to the United States and they had one boy, the
s, you know,  the age of Andrew and they wanted so the, the, the  [...] and the Szikorsky's wanted
so very badly for us to come over, but they didn't have it in time. In the meantime, I don't
know if I could start [phone ringing] talk about that
[...]
There it is.
Continue.
While we were waiting that somebody from the United States will be able to get us out from Germany,
in the meantime they were registration for different countries to go. And South America I didn't want
to go there, I don't know, we tried but, but we, we didn't want and then somebody, they told us
from the, Australia. They were from the Australian government looking for mi, migrants if they will
be good enough to come over to Australia. So we registrate to go to Australia. But we had to go  there
was a doctor from Australia and somebody else from the government and they had to find out if we are,
if I am healthy enough, because they know my medical condition, that I had, have got only one kidney
and I've only got one ear and everything else we had to tell and the doctor from Australia send me
over to a hospital not far from Wetzlar to Giessen and they will see if I am healthy or strong enough
to migrate to Australia.  And I went to that hospital for forty eight hours, they didn't feed me much,
only a piece of toast, in twelve hours or less, but they used to give eh jugs of liters to drink and
every lit, everything what I was drinking was measured and every drip of water, what I don't know
how to say it in English, eh what I, I  has, was measured.
Yes
Yes.
I understand.
You understand that.
Yes.
When it, that, and I was there for forty eight hours and they discharged me and when I got back to
Giessen nobody came with me, or they gave me something, another slice of toast and something, but eh
I was anxious to go back and I had to go to the station there and from Giessen to go to Wetzlar  because
it's a train station and when I arrived to the camp, to where we were living and I opened the door
and I fainted.  And I fainted because for hunger, that was the first time in my life, I never fainted
in, in, in Sobibor, but I fainted there. And Andrew was standing on the bed and crying what happened
to me, because I fell on the floor  and then they had this first to revived me, the doctor came along
and helped me and they gave me, you know, really, really good food, because while I was on the American
zone in Wetzlar, because of my condition I used to get double
Food.
double food, everything double.  Not that I could it all eat, but I used to get it. And that was really,
really something, they were so good for us, the American people. It's hard to describe. And then all
our friends were already gone to Australia and we were still in Wetzlar  and what has hap
You were waiting for the results?
for the, for the vi, vi, visa that we will be
They approved of you?
Yes, they a, we were waiting for the approval and all the papers that we can go there and then
we had to have some pictures taken and we had the pictures taken and the pictures got lost and
we had to get some more pictures taken and we didn't have money to pay for, for the pictures
and I just eh, eh, a, a package from the United State arrived and, and there was some coffee there,
so I sold quickly the coffee so I can pay for the, for the pictures, because that was so b, you
know, very necessary for the Australian government to have our pictures. And And, And, Andrew
was on the same migration paper with a picture, you can see in there, or, as me and all that and
then we were assigned to go  from Germany to, via Austria, to Italy. It took quite a while because
we were accepted, we were so happy, but happy in one way, but another that we couldn't go to
the United State because all our friends were already there. And here to Australia, all the friends
later on were already gone to Australia and we were all alone because of me. And  somehow we got
to Italy and we were one week in a camp there, in Kapua and from Kapua to Sydney and from Senegali
to, what is that big port in, in Italy? Eh
Venice? Genova?
Ge, eh, Ge, not Geneva, no, no, Venice, like, not Venice, eh, anyhow it will come.
Genova?
Yes, it must have been there, anyhow. And on that ship, the ship was called Casablanca and that was
a prefabricated ship, militair ship. And it was about seven hundred of us on that ship and we were going
to Australia. While we were going up the steps to the ship, a very loud person called out our name.
And he was he, holding a very big telegram, you are accepted to go to the United States. One week earlier
and we would have not come to Australia. We would have gone to the United States.
Because that was your first choice?
Yes.
But Regina
Yes?
when did your physical problems start?
In Australia
No, in, in Germany? I understand it started already in Germany?
Already in Germany, because I couldn't keep a drop of water in me and it was hurting all the time.
What was this?
That was in '47
Yes?
because the operation was in '48, the 28th of
You became ill
in April.
suddenly?
Yes I wa, was ill, not suddenly, slowly I got, and then they discovered with the X-rays, have you ever
heard how they X-ray the kidney? You know, I was lying on a blen, on a table and, and there was, injected
me with some dye in my blood and then the X-rays were taking and see if the kidneys are eh working.
One was working and the other didn't. And they decided that damaged kidney has to go.
Hmhm.
And then I was assigned to the hospital about a, a week before, but I can't remember
the day. I was in hospital a few days and eh, and I was looked after from the oma,
oma Klepp and my husband and somebody else and I was, while I was waiting for the operation,
they told me I can go and see a movie. And eh, and  where I was staying in hospital,
I forgot the name of the place at the hospital, in Giessen.
Yes.
And I can go and see a movie and I found a movie where eh it was eh the  Decision eh, eh  oh
You can say things in
my, my, f, no, that was an English movie, but with German subtitles, an American movie, that was Gregory
Peck and he was my favorite. And that was called The Decision.  And on I went to see the movie and after
that, you know, they decided the 28th of April I will have the operation.  And the kidney was removed.
And about a week after I had a terrible infection.  And the infection couldn't be helped in the clinic,
it was a private clinic. Doc, professor Bernhard was doing it. And they had to cut near the cut where
the kidney was removed, they had to do another cut to release the swelling. I don't know what it was
for, but without anesthetic. So you can imagine. They gave me a, a  handky amongs, amongst my teeth so
I wouldn't bite my tongue and they cut it and that didn't help much, but because I was in the American
section, they applied to the American army for penicillin. The infection can only get through better
penicillin or something else, another name. And the American army got through to Geneva and I got from
Switserland streptomicin. Because eh the  no, no, no it was penicillin, streptomicin was later, I got
the penicillin two o'clock in the afternoon, they told me when I had the first injection because I
didn't know where I was, I didn't know what they
You were very ill.
were doing, because the temperature was so high up.  And the only thing I cried, I screamed
once and the matron come running, and she asked me why am I sc, sc, screaming. And I said I'm
lying on a plank of wood on water and I know I can't swing and I can't run because I've
got a small boy at home. I remember all that, even with the high temperature.
And that was two o'clock in the afternoon and by eh s  four hours later they
told me it's already starting to work, because the injections were every four
hours. After the second injection it opened up and I had eh a little eh
Drain?
you know  dripper into a  you know, bowl and it's already started
to, to clean the infection from inside. And eh  it subsided
Why didn't they give you any anesthetic? Because they had anesthetic and
Yes, but that was, I wasn't strong enough on a second
anesthetic, that was after the first operation.
Oh, that's the reason?
Yes, the infection was, if you
Because they had morfine, they had opium, they had everything.
They had everything, but I, they couldn't do me, because I wasn't strong enough.
Do you really want this on the
No, no, you want to see the cut.
Okay, yes I see it, yes.
You see it.
Yes.
And there was another cut there, that was the other cut.
Okay.
Yes.
Because it's on film now, you want me to take it off?
Oh, it doesn't matter, whatever you like, you can cut it out when we get
home. If you think it's not right, you can do whatever you like.
No, don't, it's just what you want.
No, no, I, eh it doesn't matter because, I'll tell you the truth, that is what I went through
and later on they tried everything, you know, in that clinic to help me out. They were very,
very good.  And I, I started to recover. But of a sudden they ask, I haven't got mein everything
I had in the drawer it's gone, why don't I have any mirror? Where is my little mirror for
the drawer, oh the cleaner must have put it somewhere else, after three months they took me
to the sh, have a shower. And when I was under the shower with the nurse, and I ask her for
something, maybe the  eh  now how is a mirror in Germany?  I forgot.
Spiegel.
Was haben Sie mit den Spiegel getan? Was habben Sie getan mit die Spiegel in den Badhaus? Oh
they were cleaning and it br, broke. You know why they did it? I weighed only 74 pound.
That's not enough.
And I was so thin, they didn't
That's not beautiful, yes.
they, they didn't want me to see myself.
Aha.
That's why they didn't have a mirror in the bathroom.  But slowly, slowly  with injections
But it's amazing that you got a healthy child while you were
already having only one kidney. When Andrew was born.
When Marie was born
Yes.
when Andrew was born I had both kidneys.
Yes, but you were not very healthy I guess.
Not very well, I wasn't very well. But first they saw that
I am, I've got eh, eh  Blinddarm in Germany, the
Yes, ein appendicitis
Appendice, so they, they removed the appendix and then the doctor found out that I'm two months
pregnant, I didn't even know I was pregnant, you know. Anyhow, I just had my period no more.
That came back immediately after the war?
Half to the half time I got eh  and then they send me over because of that, they send
me over to a big hospital, not then, eh because the, the wound didn't heal. So I was
five months in hospital and after five months they send me home. I got home.
When was this?
In, in, in  Germany.
Okay.
They send, you know, I went there in April and I got home in December.  For Christmas.
Which home? You really got
Where I was v, living privately, where
Okay.
Andrew was, where my husband was and oma was there looking after Andrew. That,
but he didn't recognise me that I, I am his mother. You know. Anyhow
So that was the first time you got ill?
Yes, that was the first time they released me from hospital, but still I had to go [swallows] to
the eh  the camp hospital every week, every second, it wasn't too far where Andrew was born, to
chang the dressing because the, the wound wasn't healed completely.  And slowly, slowly it healed
and, and eh I got double food from the Americans and I was eating very well and everything got,
got better and better and better and then I was ac, then we, we were accepted in
I see.
I didn't tell you when I got married, how it was. I better go back and tell you. My husband said we
are going to get married in a private, not a private, in a register office. I said allright, but when?
The 24th of December, Christmas Eve. I said why, can't we wait another day? No, because our friends
are coming over, but I didn't tell him that that's for after our wedding, only they are coming over,
come for a Christmas dinner. I said thank you very much, why do you have to keep it a secret? No, they,
he decided that way. And then at the dinner, it came out that that was a wedding dinner. And they were
so angry with him, because they didn't bring me any presents and I told him you see how much we lost
[laughs], he never got eh any presents, but that didn't matter anymore.
Regina?
Yes?
Before we go to the travel to Australia
you didn't talk about missing your family.
My dear  there wasn't a day  where I wasn't thinking about them.  My mother, the grandparents
and my sister  and they, even now,  all my evening prayers and my morning prayers, after I
pray to God, I pray to them.  Telling them that I haven't forgotten you all. They're still
with me. You know?  You are always, will be with me.  Yes.  Specially my, my mother and father.
Father was a very good father, but he, he was looking after us, we never got  for him, but
that wasn't that, that thing that he would come and hug us, like certain fathers were doing.
You know, he was looking after us very nicely, but that, that, eh personal touch, he was, we
used to call him, he was a [says something in Polish] , that means the ev, eh, eh [says something
in Polish , that, that is bachelors in English
Everlasting bachelor, bachelor.
yes, yes, yes.
Eternal bachelor.
yes, that, yes, that, that what he was, but my mum was different. She was our friend, she was our
mother, she was our you name it. If you want to be a m, have a mother like that, that's what she
was. You know. And my grandmother, she used to come in every Sunday morning and  me and my sister,
because we had to wash the dishes from Saturday on Sunday morning and she said to my mum, and then
my mother was very angry with her, let the b girls go, they have to have a little bit of freedom Sunday
morning. I'll do the dishes.  [laughs] And later on I  grandmother said mum wasn't very happy
that I do that, but you are coming every Sunday, you are going to do your own thing. You are too young
to worry about it. [laughs] And things like that. Anyhow, it, it was a very, very closeknit family.
I can't explain.  And to loose all that  and to left, to be left alone  it wasn't easy, but then
when Andrew was born  slowly  I got a little bit back, I've got a son.  And then eleven years later
in Australia my daughter was born.  It's hard to describe.
Now, before we end this part
Yes?
of the interview, there's another thing you forgot to tell.
I said you told it me several times, I want you to repeat it
What was it?
at the s,  the,  when you  with
the escape
Yes.
eh  you got a goal in your life, thinking of Pechersky .
Can you, can you tell?
I had a goal, because I was asking myself more than once, even later on, I heard from people,
but I knew it, I didn't have to ask them because Pechersky words was always with me. There's
a purpose of your survival. And that purpose is  to do something about it.  Because Pechersky
said if only one of us survived, the escape is going to be a success. And I knew I'm not
the only one who survive, but I have to do my bit.  And that was the purpose of my survival,
to tell the world what they were doing. And what happened there in Sobibor. You know? People
in other camps had, you know, they were maybe a lot harder than go straighten that, because
they suffer a lot, but certain people survived the concentration camps. But in that camps
when transports were coming very seldom somebody survived.
But you did.
But I survived.  Then  I had to do what I promised. And what Pechersky told us.
We have a break.
Yes.
And then we do the last bit, which is Australia.
And we'll have a very good friend of you.
Do whatever you, you please
I really try to, to help you as much
Yes.
as I can.
I hope you feel that.
I, it's very, very rewarding what you are trying to do and what, with how you
help me. It's very rewarding because I'm not holding anything back, you
It's on.
Yes.
We were starting to talk that you  heard somebody shouting your name, be careful with
this cord,  so you heard somebody shouting your name that you could go to America.
Yes.
But you went to Australia.
Yes, we were on the  eh  plank, I don't know what you call it, the steps to go onto the ship to
go to the eh, to Australia. And somebody had, had the  for us that we can go to the United States.
It was too late.  My cousin Zelda  and some other Polish friends, they arranged it  and they got together
and they  made it for us and it was too late.  I don't know to be sorry or not, but we were so far
away here in Australia from Europe for the whole other world, it was so difficult and different and
there was another thing: we were supposed to go to Melbourne and we have already friends waiting us
for us in Melbourne. And when the ship arrived to Freemantle, before we were going to Melbourne, they
were,  to go to Sydney, because a ship before us broke down in Melbourne and they would not, in Freemantle,
they would not have made it to  to Sydney, so they stayed in Melbourne and we were going to go to
Sydney. And that was so  bad for us, because we never knew anybody in Sydney. People, the friends
were waiting at the, the  warff in Melbourne to greet us and couldn't even step down the ship, we
were devastated but we couldn't do anything else but to, to go to Sydney. And when we arrived in
Sydney, oh by the way, it was a very, very terrible voyage from Melbourne to Sydney. I think they
call it the bushtrade that is the most eh  dagerous for ships, we couldn't even step down our, our
banks. The ship was rolling, everybody was seasick, even in the, in the dining room and the casino
all the chairs were bolting down and it was such a terrible voyage from Melbourne to Sydney. But we
arrived in one piece [laughs].
But before you were there, that was a long, long journey already no doubt.
It was a long journey, it took, it took exactly with everything, took exactly 28 days, leaving Italy
and arriving to Sydney. At the 3rd of August 1949, four o'clock in the afternoon we were supposed
to get down the ship. And we walked down the ship  the first thing I did, I didn't even wait for my
husband and, and Andrew to come down, I kneeled down and I kissed the ground. Because I was in a free
country. And we are so far away from Germany and Europe. I was really, really happy.  And from there
on we were packed up  on a night train  to go to a place, it was called Bathurst that was on the bottom
of the Blue Mountains. And it was a very cold night journey, August is already like winter time in Australia
and we arrived on, on the, on the, the train, it was so cold, but I don't know how lucky I was, somebody
from the American army, he gave me a militair woolen blanket. So I could wrap up Andrew in it. He was
only two and a half. Because on the ship, before we were boarding Sydney, that was the ch, a lot of
children had measles and they were taken off the ship to a Sydney hospital, but Andrew wasn't sick
then. But w, on the way he got sick because it was so cold on the train and I couldn't wait to get
to Bathurst to, we arrived, all night we were travelling, we arrived at eight o'clock in Bathurst
eh we were getting off and then the first thing was I had to run and it was too late, because over there
they were only giving till eight o'clock breakfast and that was after eight. We didn't get anything
when we arrived there. And, and it wasn't actually the city Br, Bathurst it was a, another camp, it
was Greater  And the Greater was where the colemine was and there was a very big American militair barracks.
We were going to stay there. But Andrew was so sick, so I went into the kitchen and asked them to telephone,
as much as I could speak in English, telephone because mein son was sick, to call a doctor. And a doctor
came from the hospital and when he saw Andrew he didn't wait anymore for an ambulance, he wrapped
him up and took him to the hospital. In hospital they just, it was so nice and warm, they dressed him
in a hospital eh  pyjamas because I didn't have anything like that. Our luggage was still eh on the
ship or taken off, it was on a box that arrived about three or four days later. And then Andrew was
in hospital. That same day they discovered that he got measles. And the measles turn out to be with
something else, with pneumonia and gastro-enteritis. They didn't test him but they were going to give
him penicelline, they didn't test him if he was allergic and he was allergic to peniceline.-
Oh my God.
So you can imagine, he had, his mouth, was nothing but ulcers in his mouth, he couldn't drink, he couldn't
swallow, only through a straw.  And, anyhow, it took I don't know how many days, they didn't allow
any mother into hospital, all I used to see him is through a window, but so that Andrew wouldn't see
me. Because they said the mothers upset the children [laughs]. Anyhow, it took quite a few days and he
slowly, slowly recovered. Not, it wasn't actual a recovering, but it took, he was six weeks in hospital.
There's another thing I forgot to tell on the beginning. When we were signed up to come to Australia,
every man had to signed up for the Australian government for two weeks for work, whatever they were
put, they had to w, go to work. Nobody was asked the profession, whatever in Australia they were short
off workers, the migrants were taken there. So my husband was taken to Richmond airf, Australian Royal
Airforce as a laborer to work there with a lot of other migrants. There were some Polish migrants too
with him and all that. But that was about a night trip by train from Richmond to Greater to see us, Andrew
and myself.  Anyhow, after that hospital thing I took him to, we were giving quarters where to live [swallows]
and it wasn't straight away that my husband was taken away. First they had to, when we arrived to,
to Greater the whole world was covered in snow. It was so cold and we were coming to a semi tropical
country, so we had to find out  that they didn't mix up the ships, they took us to another place. Because
it couldn't be Australia with snow! And you have heard of the snow mountains, [says something in Polish],
we were just a few steps from it. Anyhow, we were given a, a barrack eh, room and because our name is
the last letter, Zielinski, so we were giving the last barrack. And that last barrack didn't even have
a glass in the windows. But we were giving blankets and so my husband had to put on the cover that the
windows with the blankets, so he asked for a few nails somewhere, I don't know with other men and all
that and then with other men they tried to make up something to have it a bit warm and they made up a
potbelly stove. There was enough fuel and that was heating a little bit. And later they came in, workers
came and fixed it up a little bit. But Andrew was in hospital. I think it took about two weeks that they
took my husband away for work. I'm not so sure, it could have been less or more. And then every fortnight
he used to come to greet and to visit us. When he used to leave Richmond Fridaynight, he arrived Saturday
morning in Greater. And when he was leaving for work back again, he had to leave Saturday night by train
and he arrived in Richmond Monday morning. That's how the journeys were there. And now when migrants
came, they have got it so good, they were never separated, we never complained, we were not running away
you know, what do they call them now? Not migrants, they call them eh  what do they call the people
coming now from, from the boats and all that?-
I don't know how they call it in Australia.
Allright, and eh that word will come to me, but we were not the same. We were choosen migrants and we
he had to settle down here. For the first two years it wasn't easy. And then after the two years you
could have found himself another job, but not knowing very well English, he couldn't have his own
profession. He was a journalist, but he knew French and he knew German and Polish, but he didn't know
English [laughs]. And that was the biggest joke ever. I couldn't speak much English. Anyhow, I in
the camp at Greater I find my fel, self a job, Andrew was going to a kindergarten, he was three years
old then, and there was a lot from other countries in that kindergarten. Sometimes he used to come home,
that where we were living, he, he  I didn't know sometimes what he was talking to me, he learned it
from other le, children for other languages. And one day he came home, he said a woman was hanging out
the washing and she was speaking so loud, he, she said something like that and that was a Russian woman,
she was swearing and I couldn't tell him what she was saying. I said I didn't understand, I don't
know Russian [laughs]. And that how it was the beginning. But we were happy and I was working the, the
hours that Andrew was in the kindergarten, I was helping out the, the local doctor, doctor Lewis, because
his wife wasn't a very well person. I was really happy she tought me a little bit more English and
we could learn a little bit of English in the camp. And, and the children were being tought English
a little bit, but slowly, slowly. But I stayed in that camp for two years.  And there was like two camps.
One was called the Silver City and one was called the Chocolate City. The Chocolate City had brown barracks
and we had silver barracks. The Chocolate City had all the administration for all the migrants who were
coming there. And somehow we managed to survive.  But  we arrived in August, in December I contracted
a mosquito bite in my chest there, don't know what to call it chest. And that mosquito bite was growing
and didn't go away. It didn't hurt much, but it was like a little  as big as a pigeon egg  so I
went to doctor and to hospital. The hospital they tried to find out what it was. First of all I had
to go through an operation to, to get rid of it. And I had to be in hospital. And nobody was there to
look after Andrew and Andrew, because the father was so far away and who knows when he will be coming
and he had to go to a  orphenage.  Anyhow, it was arranged, everything and the, I wasn't long in hospital,
only three days, I came back and that wound didn't heal.  They tried everything under the sun.  They
burned it, they cut it again, stitched it up again and the, the stitches came apart, it was getting
bigger and bigger and the wound didn't heal. They took me with antibiotics, that didn't help and
then one of the doctors there said we will try a on streptomicine or something, but then in the meantime
I got better and we had to leave. My husband found a place where to live. It was after the two years.
And I had a place where to live in a suburb of Sydney.-
It was called Right, Topright. I had a room, a very beautiful big room and I share with the
people who rented out that room the kitchen and the laundry and the bathroom. It was lovely.
And my husband find himself another job. And I just had to go  everyday  to Sydney to get an
injection. And it was a very big hospital, Crown Street Women's  hospital, that was I know
the biggest there in Sydney and they found out that I have to have every day an injection of
streptomicin. Till that wound heals. Because whatever they were doing, it didn't heal. In
the meantime there was a little hole getting there and the doctor said, doctor Lewis, he said
you have to be very eh, you know, patient with it because you have to take the streptomicin
every day, but not interrupt. If you interrupt even two days
You have to start again.
it's lost, you have to start again. So I got on that, so the first two years was every day, on the
weekend a nurse used to come home to give me the injection.  And I found myself a job, sowing, Andrew
was going already to eh  five years he was old too, to start at school, and I found myself a li, a job
on the school hours, so I took him to the school and with the bus to work. I was doing sowing, children's
work, Gayworth in Gladesville. And the nurse used to come to the working place to give me injection every
day. And I was on those injections home and work for three and a half years.
Gee!
Till it healed. And it healed up, it was a very big hole there.  And after I was
once in hospital where I lived, the doctor said talk to that doctor Lewis because
he's an English, what do you call the doctors that the skin, skin jobs? Eh
Dermatologists.
De eh
dermatologist, talk to him and he may help you out with
that hole. Not the dermatologist, no, because the
Plastic surgeon?
plastic surgeon, thank you, then the plastic surgeon, the doctor Lewis was an Englishman with
red hear and he was the best person ever you could talk, he was like a brother, like a father,
he was such a nice doctor. And he said I'll, I'll fix it up. So he just did two stitches,
one stitch there and one there and he tied it in a knob, put a piece of, not even as wide as a
finger, a plastic,  clear plastic and he said that will be taken off in ten days and I'll pull
the stitches out.  And he put the skin together and he covered the hole.  You can, and I'll
show it to you later. It's not important now. But you see, that  has grown
on that side, it's ho, higher than there, but that caused it. And it had a name. It
was similar like  but it wasn't. It wasn't, it had another name. But to remember medical
names is not so easy. But it healed up and everything was allright. I didn't have to
wear blouses and whatever, everything buttoned up here not to show the hole. And eh  I
was maybe right for a moment. And then  there wasn't a lot, a lot of things after that.
Can we have a little, a little stop? I have to remind myself.
Okay, it's on.
We got to know a lot of people, migrants, not even migrants, Australian peop, the Australian people
so, were so very good to us and we never heard a word go back where you come from, they helped even
with the telephone if I needed a doctor. Mrs. Brian always called the doctor, because I couldn't speak
very well English. Or once even had the  eh that I couldn't speak, what is it called, eh  that I lost
my voice [laughs], laryngitis , she used to do all the things and she used to help me out where I used
to go shopping, to look up the things in the dictionary. I had a Polish-English dictionary to look up,
because my pronunciation fo, from Polish to English was phonetic and the grocer doesn't understand
what I was talking to [laughs]. It wasn't very easy. But mine job was to learn English, forget about
writing, forget about to read the newspapers every day, to listen to the radio every. And I'll eh
try so hard and I learned it slowly, slowly. I couldn't go to night school because Andrew was little.
And my husband, after the  eh  the, the,  it was finished, the two years, he found himself a, a job,
but that was a three, eh  he had morning shift, shift work.
Yes.
He had three shift and a, and  twenty four hours, so I couldn't go anywhere. And all the school who
were learning evening classes English was in the city. And that I had to go by, by train or by bus,
I couldn't do it.  And it was something, you know, it was hard to describe. But I we, I missed something.
When the doctor re, recognised what it was that I have to have a injection every
Day.
every day  and he assigned me to, I knew a doctor, Polish doctor, eh, eh  how could I forget that?
Eh in a minute it will come.  And he told me that I have to come after work from where I was working,
to the city to him and he was in, in a  street, where all the specialists were, for an injection. Later
on I got the injections from a nurse, because that was assigned differently, I couldn't make it anymore
to run after work to, to the city. And eh  somehow, you know, I got better. And that was already done
up, but the other things came along. Different things. Complications with the ear.  The infections in
the ear. There was a doctor who wanted to heal mine ear. He wanted implant a different dr, drum so I
could hear, it didn't work. And then it took quite, I don't know how many years before that ear
was fixed up. I can't hear. On a, that was still, you know, to carry all the things from the camp.
And there were other things [swallows] beside that and I contracted because of that ear and the noise
during the war and everything, tinnitis, you know what that is?
Hmhm.
And the noise is still with me. Day and night. Sometimes it's louder, sometimes it goes down a little
bit. But it's always there.  And even if it goes away for a second I wouldn't even know, because
it never, never leaves me. And that is sometimes, the ear specialist, they couldn't do anything to
tinnitis. And sometimes you, the doctor  when he goes to Eu, to Eu, to other, eh Europe to, to conferences,
and I used to ask him have they found out something for tinnitis, he said if we find out something
for it, I'll be the first to know and he'll be the first to help me. Because it's not a easy
thing to live with all those things. But I just had to bear with this and all other things, they can't
do anything. Then  where I was working, not with baby stuff, and they were very good for me, the people
there. And I got pregnant.  But before that I had two miscarriages. But that one somehow stayed and,
you know, and I said nothing is going to happen to that, I tried so very hard to, to, to be calm, not
be calm to, but not do things what I shouldn't do. I didn't even know like with the first one,
like with Andrew the first half that I was pregnant.
Yes, you told so.
But I got to know later. And they thought, you know, when I was in hospital, in  Hospital, that eh,
eh they, they were trying to X-ray my other kidney [swallows] and they put something on mine eh stomach,
a piece of lead, and I said what are you putting there? Oh, she said, to protect your baby. I said
what baby? Don't you know that you are pregnant? I said I'm not pregnant. And they thought what
would the  we used to be called new Australians, what would Australia know she doesn't even know
that she's pregnant. But while I was in hospital to check my heart and lungs, not the kidney, I
had mine periods. And the matron came along  and I didn't bring anything with me and I told her
I would like to pay from the hospital cantine or whatever they call it, and I told her you see they,
they found out that I'm almost four months pregnant. And I didn't even know! And now I can prove
it to you that I didn't know. I wasn't sick, I wasn't vomenting, I was oh, it was no  for me.
And then  it was the, the 4th, anyhow [laughs] it was funny, we had visitors from another place and
I went with them to see a movie.  And I, I was on Monday to see the doctor [loud noises of cars going
by], the gynaecoligist in hospital, in that  Hospital, and he said I see you next Monday. And when
I came home it was allright I went to see a movie, my husband was then on afternoon shift so he will
be home at twelve, and we'll come home before twelve, so I wou, wouldn't be late and that particular
night  [loud noises]
somebody stopping here, I think I'm getting a parc, I don't
Okay, the gynaecologist, your appointment with
A, appointment with him and I said I'm also, see you next Monday because it was only the last month
of the pregnancy, for the pain, you know, every week.  And when I got home from the pictures at night
time, I saw him the day time, and I was that long in hospital from morning till the afternoon, because
there were emergencies in between, and I couldn't sleep. I fell out of bed, our bed was very low,
with the pillow and I said to my husband I had all, everything ready in a suitcase and I said oh I
can't sleep, mein back is so aching, I can't even sit or stand. And he said go back to bed, doctor
Lewis told you to come back next eh, next Monday and all that. I said I, I can't and  about six o'clock
in the morning I made it, go to the neighbour and to call an ambulance. And that was about six o'clock
in the morning and he said, you know, my husband said I'm not coming with you in the ambulance because
you're not going to have the child today. But on the way I got really, really  in labour, labour
pain. And the, the driver in the ambulance said put something between your teeth or scream as loud
as you can.  It took twenty minutes from where we were living to  Hospital. When I got to the hospital
they took me out and when I was in the lift, because the delivery room was on the third floor, when
I was in the lift my water brea, broke. I came to the hospital seven o'clock and you know, when my
daughter was born a quarter past seven.
That's a fast delivery!
It was so fast and the doctor told me [laughs], we'll you've a dau, you've got a girl or a
daughter, I can't, and you know, and they gave me an injection, something, you know, I was like
in a cloud and all that. And I, I remember what I said to the doctor are you sure it's a girl?
[laughs] And she was really, really, she was not a premature one, she was, you know, really good,
but she had long hair. And, and really a good looking baby. And after a week, I had to stay in hospital
a week, I got home  and we were already now, own home, but the home, the place wasn't finished.
We had to finish it up, we didn't have any carpets in it yet. Anyhow, because it was from week
to week, the earning, to spend the money, but it was our own place. And Marie was born the 4th of
April 1958 and that was eleven years after Andrew.  So she's eleven years
Younger.
younger.  And now she's not even living closeby. They live in Central Coast, not far from Sydney,
about eh  hour, an hour drive from Sydney.  And what else can I tell you from, about Australia?
It's not about Australia, we talk, we can
We , about my life.
Yes, well, the trial in Hagen I think, how were you approached?
How we have, we approached it very well, we build another place, that one wasn't big enough and then
after a while, you know, I got myself, and Marie was bigger, I got myself a job at home. I was working
because I stopped doing baby stuff so I got the same baby stuff, the people, the Mr. Jones got me an
overlock as I used to do the same job at the work, but I was doing it work, piece work, for baby's,
baby's clothing, used to do, I'll show you when we finish I showed you what I was doing. And eh
it was really, really good, till Marie got bigger. She went to school and that place closed down and
I found myself another place where to work. And that was Rolston Dressing Gowns.  Beautiful place, beautiful
place. And they gave me school hour work.  So when school holidays were on, I used to take work home,
because I had a, a sowing machine who could do appliqué, so I used to do for, for the work I used to
do, there I used to do the applicate work on school holidays.
And sometime we used to have a strike at the warff and they couldn't deliver the material, then
I used to help them out at home, because we were not allowed to work when the strike was on. But
I used to help out at work and  somehow, you know, we, we got it and it was an, a year before the
money was changed, we managed to have a little bit of money and we bought ourselves a car! And that
was, the money was changed here in eighty  six  or '84 from pounds to dollars.
Yes.
So we bought that  an English automatic car. And that was still for the pounds. And it was lovely.
First my husband got his drivers license, then Andrew got his drivers license and I got my drivers
license. And we were all th, three of us driving the same car. And then, when my husband retired
he couldn't drive anymore, he couldn't work because he had cataracts, he had to leave work,
but I was still working and Marie got herself a job. And, by the way, Andrew got a very good scholar,
he got a scholarship to the university. Eh, but he wasn't so good the first , second year I think,
he flunked at something, he had to repeat it and he, anyhow, there was a lot, a lot of things in
between where he was working eh, eh at school, school holidays he used to try to work. And Marie
wanted to be very, very much a pathologist.  I think it's called a pathologist, you test blood
in a hospital. But she couldn't get in, so she went back to the eh college and she got herself
a diploma for pharmaceutical eh, what is it called?
Assistant?
Pharma, eh, but she could have
Pharmacist?
Pharmacist yes, but not only for eh, even for, for  eh  farmers, to test things for the, the farmers
and all that. It wasn't just eh, eh for the pharmacy in the city, she had double, double things
and, if me move somewhere, like when she moved to Tasmania, she could work there for the farmers
and she could work in any pharmacy shop. And she still s, now she gave up the pharmaceutical because
she couldn't and then  twelve years ago [laughs], I thought I will never, never get, be a grandmother
and one day Marie came over on Mother's day, they were living in Tasmania then, she came over
for Mother's day and Andrew was living with his partner and she put on her plate a little present
for Mother's day and she said, mum aren't you go to unwrap it? I said oh you have got a little
bit of time, but I didn't noticed that she looked any different and when the presents for Mother's
day was unwrapped and she had beautiful cotton blue and white cotton booties, the, baby's first
booties. And it didn't register straight away, but Robin, Andrew's partner, screamed. And then
I knew what was happening. My daughter was pregnant. I couldn't believe that that will ever happen!
Because she was already married for quite a while and she was , I figure almost fourty when Nicholas
was born.
So when were you in touch again with Germany and Sobibor? How did that happen?
Oh that happened, oh in nine  eighty three, 1983, but before that they called me to the German
consulate in, in Sydney. And they had a b, some lawyers and some, I don't know, but five men
came over from Germany and one defendant, that was for me, he was defendant me, and they were
asking questions. And they had a very, because I was telling them what I remembered and all that,
but that was not in '83, that could have been '82 or 1980, in Sydney. And my daughter was
with me. Because Andrew was already eh somewhere else, he couldn't come with me.
And they wouldn't, he would not have helped anyhow and eh then they was asking a lot about Sobibor.
And then I was telling them what I could and about Gomersky about other Scharführers, Wagner and
what Wagner did to me and all that. Could I recognise, what Wagner, everybody know what, what happened
to Wagner, but Gomersky could I recognise him? I said if I saw maybe I could, but I wasn't sure
what they were planning to do. They brought over a very big album. With SS-men. And normal soldiers
and private eh Nazi people. Not in the uniforms anymore, but in, in civil clothing and I should recognise
Gomersky. If I would recognise him, then they knew that I was in, in
Sobibor.
Sobibor. And I looked
Had they found you or, or ?
eh, I don't know how they found me, that I live in, maybe through the United States,
because I've put in a claim for restitution. And that's how they found me. I still
had that German Arbeitsbuch where I was and I had witnesses, Zelda, was in the United States
a witness I was in Sobibor, Esther Raab was there and there was  Samuel Lerer
Hmhm.
I knew he lives in the United States.
You had contact with them?
I had contact with them. Someday needed me as a witness and I needed them for witness and I was called
to Sydney. And then not straight away to Germany, and then they wanted me to recognise Gomersky and
eh I looked over that album, I looked as much as I could and I couldn't see them and they, you know,
gave up at me. But they had a break for lunch, but I didn't go with them for lunch, I stayed at the
at, at, the, the room there, the, the German consulate and I asked the lady who was eh  a little help
me out with, I knew very perfect in German, help me out with everything, and English, and to leave that
album with me. I want slowly to go over. And I must find, because I still remember Gomersky's face.
And you wouldn't believe it that I found him. You know they had every photograph, just numbers, but
they had another catalogue, the number points to Gomersky was number twelve, and later on in the sa,
I said that is Gomersky and that lady, that, that secretary went to that other book and she looked up
number twelve and that was Gomersky. So she even clapped that I found him.  And, anyhow, they accepted
it and after that I was called to Germany in '83. As a witness for Frenzel. They told me when to come
and doc, eh, eh, judge Kremer rang me up at Sydney, explained everything and would I need a, interpreter.
I said eh an English interpreter, but you know what they did? They gave me a Polish interpreter, because
I come from Poland. It didn't matter, you know? And I could still speak to them in German, if I couldn't
get it, if I, I know that the eh interpreter didn't said it right, I could correct it in German to
them.  And [swallows] Andrew came with me. I said I'm not coming alone to Germany and when my daughter
was still living, I think she was already in Tasmania living, in '83  or maybe she was still studying,
my dear , the, the, dates, the, the, the year and the dates aren't sometimes, not hazy but I can't
place that
It doesn't matter.
that doesn't matter, and then, when I got to Germany with Andrew, we got to Frankfurt  and eh
when we were, from Frankfurt we board eh a train to Hagen and when we arrived at Hagen we were
taken to the hotel, to, everything was so beautifully arranged, everything! And first of all it
was from Sydney eh, eh, is not eh, not first class but eh, what is the other class called?
Business class.
Business class, that was very nice, Lufthansa, , you know,
flight and that was straight to, to, to Frankfurt.
And, and
Just go on.
yes, I can go on
Yes, sure.
and that, when we arrived in Hagen every, everything was  really, really  good. When
we were in the hotel, we had two visitors.  A gentleman and a lady came to visit is
with flowers.  That was  Jules Schelvis, two Dutch people  and Dunya Brouwer?
Breur, yes.
Yes, how they pronouce it?
Breur.
Breur, Breur. And eh they were all time there, when everything was going on. It was about five days.
But then we had an interruption  for Easter I think. And we had to come back, we had a few days
off and while I was off, I went with Dunya and with Schelvis to Holland, because it was Easter time,
Pesach. And Andrew went with his partner to  eh, England, something  not actually London, but other
places. My tinnitis just came on so loud! Eh, come on.  And  we got allright, then we got back and
everything was allright and whatever happened in Hagen I don't have to tell you, I think you know
all about it. While I was asked what to do and what to say and what
I want you to, for the, for the video to tell the story of the map.
Of the map, yes I will tell you. Before the map I will tell something else. You know, they were talking
and, you know, I was sitting there. Mein eh translator was sitting there. And where you were sitting,
there was Frenzel and he, and his lawyer. But I had to turn my back a little bit, so I wouldn't look
at Frenzel. Only I was looking straight where the judges were. There were about two or three judges and
some prosecutors and they had everything on the tapes what I said in Sydney. And what I said somewhere
else, you know, when I was interviewed and they had it, and then it was quite a few years after and that
was in '83, 1983 in Hagen and they were asking question and I was telling them and all that and of
a sudden somebody, I don't know, it wasn't judge Kremer, somebody else, did I see who was shooting
when I was escaping? Did I see who was shooting?  Then I couldn't keep quiet any longer, I stood up
and told them straight in their eyes would you look back if somebody was shooting at you?  Wir verzeihen,
eh verzeihen Sie mir bitte. . Entschuldigen Sie mir bitte.
Yes. And the same thing was with, with judge Kremer, but he was a civilized person, not like the others.
And then la, Frenzel's lawyer tried so very hard to discredit me. He tried very hard and I said to
them you have everything black on white, or you have everything on tapes and I'm getting older, I'm
not old yet, but I have to have everything in my head. And if sometimes a sentence is said back to front,
you must understand that.  And then when it came to that, to that time when I saw, I went to the toilet
and I saw to that bush, it was a fence, it was a gate, but we called it fence, bush fence, naked women
were walking in that particular road from one camp to the third camp, was called the Himmelstrasse
and they were walking to the gas chambers, they were all naked
Naked, yes.
and I had to show on the map where that was. Everybody was, knew where our toilets were,
because we were that many in the camp, you know, because the, the girls, the women and the
girls had only a different barrack from the men, but it was in the same compound.
Sure.
Yes, anyhow.
And, anyhow, and when he told me, judge Kremer told me, he even gave me, not a pencil but
a little stick to show where that bush fence was, where the toilets were and I went down
And where you could look outside to see
that where I could
Himmelstrasse
yes, from when I was going to the toilet I could see it, and then I was, had to show it to them.
And when I got down, because that was like a big blackboard, and that map was hanging on that blackboard
[swallows] and I went down to it and I looked at it and I looked at it, and I couldn't find it.
And I said to judge Kremer, he came down, after I said eh that is not the map of Sobibor. And that,
that lawyer was so, sitting there and smiling, he was so happy about it. So judge Kramer came down
from the podium and he came over to the map and he had a look at it and he said can I excu, excuse
me please, somebody turned it around, it's upside down.  And he put it right on that stand where
the map was, like a blackboard and I showed him there were the toilets and there's the bush fence.
And you should have heard in that court the clapping. Because there were a lot of students, university
students and other school people and ordinary people, I don't know, and then that was  thing,
that, that, that lawyer, Frenzel's lawyer couldn't cross me off that I'm not pretending to
be at, at Sobibor, you know.
Was it a trap they had put out for you, or was it an accident?
I don't know who did, they don't know who did it.  You know. I don't know. Till today I
tried to find out who was there, was it the cleaner, was it somebody who could have put upside
down and you never checked it before you called me over to it?  I wish I could speak very well
German, I could speak to you. How is it in German to check, warum haben Sie nich eh
Kontroliert?
spI
? Verifiert?
No, there's another word for it, we, fe, why didn't you check it before, warom haben
Sie nicht eh das, das gesehen? Dat, das, das, that, that isn't, nicht eh, forgive me, I,
I can speak German, but not when I have to speak to somebody. It comes out with a lot of
English. You know how it is with a language, if you don't use it, you lose it.
Yes.
Yes. But when I read, I can understand every word from a German
magazine, a book. And I still have got German stuff.
So from Hagen you made contact with Jules and Dunya
Yes, yes.
you already had contact with the other survivors?
I think they have, they have been there, because there were never two survivors called over
to Hagen together. They, everybody, when they want to come as a witness, they were
They had to come alone.
they were marked, marked out different times. So I don't know who came after me. It could
have been, but I still, later on I couldn't find out what they did to Frenzel, because
they said he's not a well man, he was already in, in eh  in jail and he was released because
of health problems and all. He himself had five children at home, he was only a cabinet maker,
Frenzel, before he, he became a SS-man and all that. But I didn't know all that. And then
people were asking me, wou, did he got sentenced again. I said
I said don't ask me, because I couldn't care less what happened to him. But when I came back
to Sydney, you should have seen, the Sydney Jewish Museum, there wasn't a Jewish lawyer, there
wasn't even another lawyer, they wanted to know how it, a  came along like that in a German court,
how many were there, ex, expect me, you know, alone to be alone without anybody who could be beside
me, only my son was with me.  You know? Who, who could, he couldn't even protect me because he,
he was only, he knew what I was telling. He  I was alone there and I had to protect myself. If they
would have had, like Frenzel had a lawyer, I should have had a lawyer too.  But I didn't, I didn't
know I could have asked for one.  But one thing it was very, very good, that judge Kremer was a beautiful
human being. I kept forgetting that he is a German judge, because he was so humane. And the others
were not like that, they kept on asking questions, like asking me did I see who was shooting. Kremer
didn't ask that. Or there was another question: how did I know that the, in the th, third camp,
because mein brother was in the third camp and found out, but that's a little too much to stretch
it out, how I found out that the younger brother was in the third camp and then they were executed,
the 27th of June, how did I know there were 27 eh inmates  in third camp?  And I said, I don't
know who asked me that question, another judge or was it Kremer, I said I didn't know how many
was there, but then I stood up and I asked judge Kramer would you have forgotten your mother's
birthday? He said no. I said the 27th of June was my mother's birthday, I never said how many inmates
was in camp three.
But you knew the day.
I knew the date because that when my brother was hot, the whole lot, something happened there
where they were working to the mines, one night they exploded and they, it was said that they
wanted to escape and somebody said a, a dog went over and then the mine exploded and that was
the 27th of June.  You know. Everybody in the camp, the girls knew. Why did it have to happen
to him, and that's my mother's birthday today.  And that's what I told, told the, the,
in, in the court. But I stood up and I said it in German to judge Kremer.
It was also the beginning of our friendship with Dunya, isn't it?
Pardon?
It is also the beginning of our friendship with
That friendship with Dunya is hard to describe. She was a friend, she was a sister, she was a brother
and a mother, was the most precious person for me.  Because I got to know her.  And when I was in
Amsterdam, in the Rijksmuseum, Dunya took me to that room where her mother had a room of the, the,
the, the things from her book. She had a room and on the door was that big boot [or booth?] hanging,
I've got a small boot [or booth?] hanging from that Ravensbrück camp.
Because Dunya's mother was in Ravensbrück?
Yes. And I want to show you, I've got something hanging in the laundry what Dunya send me over from
Ravensbrück.  Oh gosh, Dunya was something that nobody can replace her for me and for Andrew It was
something that we have a bond.  You should have seen the photograph, the children when I stayed with
her, I send this photograph back and, and Jetje gave it to the sons, because when they were little
children, I stayed there with Dunya. You know both children were with me, we used to speak a lot. Anyhow,
and I couldn't maybe understand that, but Dunya, Dunya was speaking Germany and I speak German, she
could speak English just as good as German, but better German than, than English and I was a lot, I
was really good with German then [laughs]. And then  there are certain things I have forgiven people,
but one thing I will never forgive, Jules not to let me know when she passed away. Through a student
in Melbourne, who was interesting, he just came back from Amsterdam  and he was interesting about that
I, how he found out about Dunya and he told me that Dunya is not there. And that was, her birthday
was the 30th of June and I send a birthday card and always little presents, not eleborate things but
so she will remember me, you know, and  she died. I don't know a day for her, before her birthday
or a day after her birthday and Jules never let me know. And I, and I told him  I can forgive you everything
wrong  but I'll never forgive you for that. You know what Dunya was for us both, for Andrew and for
myself.  And even for Marie.
Now  I think we have most  the subjects we could do.
Yes.
But is there something we have forgotten or is there a message you have at the end of the interview?
A message to who?
The world.
To the world?
To yourself?
Yes. I'll tell you something. Never  eh I don't want, how shall I say, eh, vengeance. Because I'm
not build for, I'm not born for vengeance. I only would like that it would be done  right, I'll never
forget, get and I will never forgive them. But whatever I do, it's not because I hate them, because
hate is disease, it will eat me up. But I'll never forgive them what they did.  I know there's a
new generation, I don't hate the new generation, I don't, don't eh  how shall I say, the  they've
got new live now, they can't look back. And I maybe should not look back, but it's so hard. And I
couldn't burry the things what happened to me when I was younger, but when I'm, one gets older you
can't shake it.  When I was younger I should, could shake it off like a duck shakes off the water from
the, from the feathers. But I can't do it now. It stays with me. All the time.  And what I can say
to the world, be good, be a good man, don't harm anybody, think twice when you  eh, don't forgive
somebody, there's always forgiveness for a lot of things.
Now there's a poem you just cited to me by which you want to show your generousity
to all others who have suffered. Do you re, mind to repeat that?
What is it, for that, that's
Yes.
that is a song.
Do you want to sing it, or you want to
I maybe a tiny  it, because I haven't got, because of mein nose and throat, mein eh voice
is not good to sing it, but I will remind a little bit the melody maybe. [sings]
Ich will mich vergessen, singen sehr viel, alles wie ein Traum, wie in Kinderspiel ,  wo ist mein Welt,
auf der grosse Welt, wo ist mein Heim, wo ist mein Zelt, freulich spielt Zigeuner Lieder, Ich möchte
vergessen von All, klingeln  von den Zigeuner Walz,  schon Alles in Leben verloren, kein mother, kein
father, kein Heim, bin Ich den von ein Stein geboren, warum ist die Welt von mir weit. Die Sonne hat
niemals für mich nicht gescheint, der Regen hat immer with mir mit geweint, kein father or mother,
mother hat mich nicht erzogen, och nein, gepflecht hat mich der Wind und der Schnee, freulich spielt
Zigeuner Lieder, Ich möchte vergessen von All. That's the refrain.  I guess and from now klingeln
soll jeden  von den Zigeuner Walz,  schon Alles in Leben verloren, kein Vater, kein Mutter, kein Heim,
bin Ich den von ein Stein geboren, warom ist die Welt von mir weit.
Can I ask you something, where you
Yes.
this, this poem, this song is very important to you.
Do you feel yourself a Zigeuner or, or
I fee, I, I felt myself when it happened, because he hasn't got anything in the world,
he hasn't got a home, he hasn't got a  you know, hasn't got the, the, the , he
hasn't got a mother or a father, didn't, didn't bring him up  it looks like he
never had anything, he, and he was asking bin Ich denn von ein Stein geboren? Warum
ist die Welt von mir so weit?  And that Zigeuner used to be like that.
Now you became a
And I became a Zigeuner.
Thank you Regina.
Not that I became a Zigeuner, but I felt like that Zigeuner. And there's another little
song in Polish, that somebody came and recorded, from Sydney, he's a professor of international
song writing and I, I didn't know that he will record it and he got it even translated!
But that is in Polish, I never translated that in any other
Can you tell in Polish? We'll translate it.
I can tell in Polish of course. A mother, a woman was asking a, eh little boy,  [says something
in Polish], that was a recorder, he was playing, a little boy [says something in Polish] and that
boy answered [says something in Polish] mama will translate it later. [says something in Polish]
And then he came on s, not singing, but the music [says something in Polish], you now that recorder
[says something in Polish]. Now I'll translate it for you. A woman was asking a boy who was playing
with a melody, and that melody had words and she ask him: why Johnny do you, is your music so sad?
And he said because I'm sad, because I haven't got, I've, my father and my mother died af,
straight after him and their graves are just there behind the hill. And then he started on playing
and he said to his recorder [says something in Polish] please eh, eh make the music, let's all
the hills and the fields and the meadows hear you, the music and let them know how hard it is to
be a, eh  [says something in Polish] that is, what is
Say it in German.
eh, it hasn't got any, parents, what is the child called? Eh, orphan
Orphan.
but the hardest pain in life is to be an orphan. And that is
from the primary school, that song. I know dozens of them.
Regina, thank you very much.
Thank